Atoms One: Lennard Jones Potential and Atoms in Motion All material things are made of atoms. All atoms move in perpetual motion. They weakly attract one another when close, but repel each other strongly when squeezed too close. This pattern is known as an inter-molecular potential, and is key to understanding the phenomena of solids, liquids, and gasses. In gasses, the atoms are scattering off one another in all directions, colliding like a game of cosmic pinball. This is what a gas actually is. But, on the other extreme we have solids. In solids, the atoms are all stuck together in a regular lattice of rows and columns, and cannot move around. In liquids however, the atoms are able to move around, sliding past each other, but cannot break free all together. This is what makes something a liquid. With an intuitive grasp of atoms in motion, it is interesting to look at the characteristics that this motion can take. For example, imagine a cluster of atoms vibrating at a bunch of different frequencies. Such waves in the atomic structure of a material are called sound waves. Sound waves with a high frequency or pitch have a short wavelength, while sound waves with a low frequency and low pitch have long wavelengths. Heat is also atoms in motion. In fact, it’s the random motion on the scale of the atoms themselves. Therefore, the very highest frequencies of sound are actually modes of vibration that constitute the temperature of an object. In other words, remove all high pitched sounds within the material, including the sound waves with wavelengths on the atomic scale, and the temperature would drop to absolute zero. The sound spectrum also continues to the low end with very long wavelengths and very low frequencies. We can also think of vibrating atoms in terms of their period of oscillation. A material object that moves back and forth slowly enough, has wavelengths so long, that they cover the entire object at a macroscopic scale. Since the atoms are moving in unison, its no longer a sound wave, but simply the motion of the object as a whole. Yes, even the atoms in a speeding bullet are moving as it flies. So, as we can see, motion, sound, and heat, are all just different manifestations of atomic vibrations. However, one might imagine what happens if we include just a feeble touch of self-gravity to our inter-molecular potential. Given by Newton’s laws of motion and universal gravitation, the interplay between gravity on our fluid will have some interesting effects. On a small scale, gravity is negligible. But as we zoom out, the amount of atoms in our view increases, and the amount of gravity accumulates. Eventually, as we zoom out past the scale of entire worlds, and we can treat each world as a single object, accelerating objects toward it, according to the inverse-square law in 3D space. It’s this self gravity of large enough worlds, that makes them spherical, such as the Earth itself. And it is also the reason the solar system holds together. But don’t even get me started on the complicated dynamics that gave birth to our solar system in the first place. Take an expanding cloud of gas, with atoms that obey the inter-molecular potential and also Newton’s gravity. The gasses first cool down, and tiny grains form, like a cloud of snow particles. As the cloud fragments, the particles collide and stick, with larger fragments orbiting around one another. Within a relatively short time, you end up with a cosmic web, filled with galaxies that look like spinning pinwheels, and within each galaxy, solar systems containing stars, planets, moons, asteroids and comets, all in orbit around each other. Not bad, because this is exactly what the large scale structure of our actual universe looks like in the first place. 