Atoms Three: Atomic Structures and Substructures As it turns out, every atom of the periodic table consists of a heavy and dense, positively charged nucleus, surrounded by two fields, the electronic field and the optic field. The discrete vibrations of the electronic field are the negatively charged lowmass electrons in atoms, while the discrete vibrations of the optic field are the photons of light, which carry the electric and magnetic forces from one place and time to another. Put together, electrons and photons create all of the solid state and chemical forces within any substance. Within an atom, the electrons fill “shells” or orbitals two electrons at a time. Each of these orbitals is a standing wave of the electronic field. Since the nucleus is heavy and positively charged, it creates a sink for electrons to be attracted to. The reason why electrons fill one orbital at a time is because they are anti-symmetric under exchange. This is what makes an electron a particle of matter. For comparison, photons of light carry the electric and magnetic forces, because they are symmetric under exchange. Ultimately the reason why electrons are anti-symmetric, rather than symmetric, is tied to the fact that the electronic field itself only transforms half as much as the optic field does under a change in spacetime perspective. But enough about electrons and photons, what is the atomic nucleus anyways? After all, if electrons and photons were all there is, there would be only a single type of atom: Positronium and nothing else, and even then, given that Positronium atoms annihilate by themselves in less than a billionth of a second, what gives? The answer lies in the fact that there are roughly 250 stable nuclei, and thousands more unstable nuclei. Once we zoom inside the nucleus, we understand that it is a chaos of nucleons and pions. It is said that nucleons are quark triplets, and pions are quark-antiquark pairs. But, in reality, the nucleus is a swarm of quarks and gluons, that are discrete waves in their respective fields, that only resonate fully as composite units. There is much to know as of yet about the field equations, such as their non linear behaviors, which are important to the structure and function of various nuclei, such as properties like radioactivity and binding energies. But all of the nuclei would not exist, without a chain of events of the early universe, known as the big bang. 