Atoms Two: Abundances of Hydrogen and Helium in the Universe From this idea, all we need is an empty box, that we fill with a gaseous mix of atoms. But one question arises… What atoms do we use, and by how much? By studying the cosmic abundances of the elements, we can determine that by mass, 75% of the universe is Hydrogen-1, and 25% is Helium-4. Almost. However, there are tiny impurities that makes life possible. Lets take a closer look. These impurities also are atoms. Bigger atoms. Atoms like Oxygen, Carbon, and Nitrogen, which are essential for the building blocks of life. They and all other atoms only adds up to another 2% of the universe by mass. If the total mass of all atoms is a metric ton, roughly only 20 kilograms of these impurities would be needed. Lets begin with Oxygen. Oxygen is the 8th element on the periodic table. It is a very reactive and corrosive gas, as it needs 2 more electrons to complete its outer valence shell. Burning Hydrogen and Oxygen together, forms water vapor in an explosive crack. Oxygen also forms diatomic molecules, which constitute 21% of our atmosphere. So, air, water, and even rocks contain lots of oxygen. So lets add 10,420 grams of Oxygen-16 to our box. Next up is Carbon, Carbon is the 6th element on the periodic table. Commonly seen in soot or charcoal as graphite, it needs 4 electrons to complete its outer shell. Hydrocarbons such as Methane, are what happens when carbon and hydrogen combine. Carbon Dioxide, are what happens when carbon and oxygen combine. In fact carbon can form more molecules and compounds, than all other molecules without carbon combined. Carbon is therefore the next element that is essential for life. Lets now add 4,680 grams of Carbon-12 to our box. After this, elements get harder to find. In the case of Neon, it is a noble gas, in the sense that neon atoms don’t bond with any other atoms, including themselves. Because its completely non-reactive, means that an atom of neon is a loner. It is the 10th element on the periodic table. Lets include 1,340 grams of Neon-20 to our box. Iron is the 26th element of the periodic table. It is a transition metal. It is a very dense metal, usually likes to lose 2 or 3 electrons depending on the situation, and is found in abundance in the earths outer and inner core. On the surface, it is used as the main component of steel, and therefore modern bridges, ships and skyscrapers will be impossible without it. Lets add 1,090 grams of Iron-56 to our box. Then there is Nitrogen, Nitrogen is the 7th element on the periodic table. The most natural form is of a diatomic gas, comprising 78% of our atmosphere, with Nitrogen atoms needing 3 electrons to complete their outer shells. In Ammonia, it is achieved by combining with Hydrogen. Nitrates are Nitrogen with Oxygen, and Cyanide is Nitrogen with Carbon. Not exactly pleasant, but is also a key component of amino acids in proteins, some vitamins, and even DNA. Lets thus add our 960 grams of Nitrogen-14 to our box. Silicon is the 14th element of the periodic table. It is a semimetal, which means its properties are between that of a metal and a non-metal. It is this property that makes modern computers possible. Silicon tends to lose 4 electrons to Oxygen, forming a mineral known as Quartz. Glass crystal is just Quartz, and most of the Earth rocks in the Continental Crust are mainly Quartz. Lets add 650 grams of Silicon-28 to our box. Magnesium is the 12th element of the periodic table. It is an alkaline earth metal. From its name, Magnesium tends to lose 2 electrons to Oxygen, and when combining with quartz minerals, forms a mineral known as Olivine, a green jewel that is a key component of most of the Earth’s mass in its Mantle, even including some Oceanic crust. Lets add 580 grams of Magnesium-24 to our box. Second to last is the stinkiest element, Sulfur. Sulfur is the 16th element of the periodic table. Some common forms of sulfur include hydrogen-sulfide, the gas with the characteristic rotten egg smell, and sulfuric acid which is found in car batteries, and is extremely corrosive. Sulfur combines with other elements in our bodies in many proteins, and a few vitamins. Lets add 440 grams of Sulfur-32 to our box. Lastly, we have Argon. Like Neon, and Helium before it, it is a noble gas, comes as single atoms, and is completely inert and non reactive. It is the 18th element of the periodic table. Lets finish by adding 200 grams of Argon-36 to our box. So in short, many of these elements make like possible. With a universe as large as ours, it would be quite strange if earth life is the only life out there. With Oxygen, Carbon, and Nitrogen, in the mix from the get go, alien life should be inevitable. But this is the last 2% of all atoms by mass. Hydrogen and Helium make the atomic majority. Hydrogen-1 makes 75% of our metric ton box, and Helium-4 makes 25% of our metric ton box. Hydrogen-2 and Helium-3, although stable, are quite rare in terms of mass, but by number, 26.4 ppm is Hydrogen-2 and 10.3 ppm is Helium-3. Also by number this means that we have 750,000 ppm of Hydrogen-1, and 62,500 ppm of Helium-4. Hydrogen tends to form diatomic molecules, and Helium being a noble gas is an inert gas of single atoms. Hydrogen is the 1st element of the periodic table, and Helium is the 2nd element of the periodic table. But! That is not all there is, and far from it. In fact, remember that all material things are atoms, but that isn’t to say that other forms of energy exist out there that are not atoms. You might be surprised to know that 5 metric tons of microscopic black holes have to be added to the box, in order to match cosmological observations. These black holes are essentially invisible and intangible, just like a ghost. This is because the invisible matter that holds galaxies together into the cosmic web, interacts only through gravity. As we know already, a rotating black hole is a particle with mass and spin, just like an electron in an atom or photon of light. In other words, the fleeting existence of quarks and gluons inside the atomic nuclei we discussed are also microscopic black holes. Everything is black holes! It’s just that the black holes in atomic matter have properties with such small mass, that they act more like ripples in fields, but nonetheless, the invisible matter that holds the galaxies of the cosmic web together is real. 