Cosmos Three: Lets Go Nuclear! One second passes, then five, then 20 seconds have elapsed. Then a minute passes. The residual nuclear force, is strong enough to bind the nucleons together, but this isn’t happening at all. This is because when a proton and neutron collide and form a deuteron, a high energy photon will break the first nuclei right back down to the nucleons that already exist. But a deuteron has a binding energy of 2 MeV, so it should be stable enough to exist. Nope. Remember that there exist 20 billion photons. Even if the average temperature of this thermal radiation is on the order of 100 keV, or 0.1 MeV, there will still be a few outliers with energies over 2 MeV. Even if a few very high energy photons exist, its over for a deuteron. The universe continues to expand and cool. Yet again, as always, the universe expands and cools. Also, neutrons decay, so given that we started with 3 neutrons at first, after 3 minutes, there are only 2 neutrons left, as one of the neutrons has beta decayed back to a proton, along with an electron and an antineutrino. We now have 20 billion gamma ray photons, along with 14 protons and 2 neutrons. Also, an excess of 14 electrons also exist, along with the hundreds of millions of electron-positron pairs that are under constant annhililation. The universe continues to expand and cool. So this means that for the next four minutes or so, not much changes to the firestorm of gamma-rays and annihilating electron-positron pairs. A few of the many neutrons that still exist, have naturally decayed back into protons, so while the neutron to proton ratio used to be 1 in 5 a few minutes ago, right now its closer to 1 in 7. The average lifetime of a free neutron is 880 seconds, otherwise put, 14 minutes and 40 seconds. I should note that although the temperature is well high enough for fusion to occur, the sheer energy and number of gamma ray photons will shred down any nuclei that try to form, so the universe, as of now, contains only free protons and free neutrons. The universe continues to expand and cool. Then, right after the clock strikes 4 minutes and 20 seconds, does something dramatic happen: Nuclear fusion! Now, as the temperature decreases, there are less and less photons with energies of 2 MeV, and when the temperature, or average photon energy, drops below 78 keV, deuterons are stable, and the fusion process continues on. In other words, the intensity of gamma radiation is now low enough for the first nuclei to not be blown apart. Most nuclei that could form at this point, like tritons or helions, also have binding energies not much more than deuterons. However there is one special kind of nucleus, known as an alpha particle. It has a whopping binding energy of 28.3 MeV. That is to say 28,300 keV! The universe continues to expand and cool. At this point the majority of the nucleon excess is in protons, alpha particles, and neutrons. But if one zooms out to get a larger sample size, not of 16 nucleons, but of 10 million nucleons, one finds out that not only do other nuclei form, but their abundance shows they act as intermediate steps from the conversion of single nucleons into alpha particles. Out of 10 million nucleons, the peak number of nuclei is the following: 5,041 deuterons, and 683 tritons. A deuteron consists of a bound state of one proton and one neutron. A triton consists of a bound state of one proton and two neutrons. After this peak in abundance, the deuterons and tritons get used up in the formation of more alpha particles. The universe continues to expand and cool. An alpha particle consists of two protons and two neutrons. The stability of alpha particles, is extremely important in the near future of the nuclear reactions. Every proton and every neutron in existence are now smashing together to build alpha particles: Clusters of 2 and 2, that is to say, 2 neutrons with 2 protons. The universe is now 265 seconds, or 4 minutes and 25 seconds old. At this point, as soon as alpha particles form, it becomes extremely difficult to destroy them. All nuclei that contain any neutrons, including the soon to decay neutrons themselves eventually get locked up inside these alpha particles. The universe continues to expand and cool. As the number of free neutrons declines to zero, the nuclear reactions which have been proceeding rapidly, radically changes its form. Out of 10 million nucleons total, the following abundances have occurred as follows: The number of deuterons drops from 5,041 deuterons to 264 deuterons. The number of helions grows from zero to 102 helions. A helion consists of a bound state of two protons and one neutron. Also, the number of tritons drops from 683 tritons to 1 triton nucleus. This it will remain for years to come. The universe continues to expand and cool. For the next 10 seconds, the number of alpha particles, grows to a value of 1 alpha particle for every 12 protons. The story of alpha particles, is not over yet. As the clock reaches 4 minutes and 30 seconds, all of the neutrons get used up in the reaction, and the 10 seconds of nuclear fusion grinds to an immediate halt. Why so early? Even though fusion is still occurring in vast quantities, not much happens to the composition of the nuclei. The 12 protons, and 1 alpha particle, are all smashing into one another. When such a collision takes place, it produces an unstable nucleus with 5 or 8 nucleons. Such a nucleus will undergo alpha decay, and revert right back to the same nuclei as before. The universe continues to expand and cool. After some more time for the universe to expand and cool, the universe ages past the 20 minute mark. However, these stable nuclei are positively charged, and like charges repel. This means that there is an electric potential barrier right beyond the reach of the residual nuclear force. As the nuclei slow down, there is less and less kinetic energy available, and by the end of the first hour of the universe, almost every nucleus avoids every other nucleus around it. The ever expanding and cooling universe now has a chemical formula of 12 protons, 1 alpha particle, which goes along with an excess of 14 electrons over millions of electron-positron pairs, and also the 22 billion photons of gamma-ray light. The universe continues to expand and cool. The fusion process halts completely, as the 12 protons, and 1 alpha particle, not only fail to create new nuclei, but at this point they don’t touch eachother in the first place. The nuclei just avoid eachother from now on. The universe continues to expand and cool. In the background, the invisible intangible radiation of the 18 billion neutrinos has been existing alongside the 22 billion gamma ray photons. Since neutrinos decoupled within the first second of existence, they’ve been hardly interacting with anything. But that doesn’t mean they do not exist. As electron-positron pairs annhililate away into photons, this increases the photon temperature, but not the neutrino temperature. And since everything coupled to the photon temperature as of now, its useful to ignore the lower but original neutrino temperature. If you must know, compared to a photon temperature of 1, the neutrino temperature is the cube root of 4/11. The universe continues to expand and cool. Hours into the creation of the universe, the last few dozen electron-positron pairs finally annihilate away into even more photons of gamma-ray light. The particle count is now, 12 protons, 1 alpha particle, 14 electrons, and 22 billion photons. This it will remain for almost an eternity. As a sense of comparison, a proton weighs as much as 1,836 electrons, and an alpha particle weighs as much as 7,294 electrons. The universe continues to expand and cool. 
