Cosmos Two: The Quarks Held Hostage! Then, all of a sudden, right after 30 microseconds, the quarks and antiquarks bind together, into subatomic particles known as hadrons. Hadrons made of three matter quarks are known as baryons, and hadrons made of a quark antiquark pair are known as mesons. The lightest baryons are the nucleons, which have a mass of 940 MeV. The lightest mesons are the pions, which have a mass of 135 MeV. However the up quarks with masses of 2.01 MeV, and the down quarks with masses of 4.79 MeV, that make up these subatomic particles only contribute 1% of the total mass of the hadron. Strange quarks are the only exception to this rule, as they have a mass of approximately 95 MeV. These hadrons are confined, as it is impossible to remove any quarks or gluons for that matter, without creating other hadrons in the process. The fundamental strong nuclear force only acts within one of these subatomic particles, because of this confinement. This confinement is caused by the taffy life gluon flux tubes that emerge from the center of the hadron, and stretch out to the locations of the quarks. Again this is caused by the self interaction of the 8 types of gluons. Most hadrons have a physical size of around 1 femtometer. This is 100 times larger than the weak force can carry. In terms of electron volts, this corresponds to a value of 197 MeV. The temperature is dropping below 200 MeV. The universe continues to expand and cool. Over the course of a few dozen microseconds after the quark gluon plasma transitions to a baryon meson gas, the resulting subatomic particles are much to heavy to exist, and as such they annhililate away. The small excess of matter quarks over antimatter quarks that are left behind, is now in the form of nucleons, which are the protons and neutrons. This is the very first real tangible matter in the universe. A proton is made of 2 up quarks and 1 down quark, and a neutron is made of 2 down quarks and 1 up quark. Yet these nucleons are outnumbered in the billions by the rediculous numbers of pions, that are being copiously produced in the seething 150 MeV heat. But what is important here is that as all kinds of quarks and all kinds of antimatter quarks, warred for supremacy, emerged a thin excess of protons and neutrons: The particles of matter we know today. The universe continues to expand and cool. Yet the temperature not going to be this hot for long. So as the temperature drops below 135 MeV, pions begin to decay. The pions being made of quark antiquark pairs are very unstable. The charged pions are made of one up quark, and one anti down quark, or vise versa, and thus take a couple dozen nanoseconds to decay. The neutral pions on the other hand, are made of a quark antiquark pair of the same quark flavor, and so annhililate almost immidiately. Muons which weigh around 105 MeV, go next, after a couple microseconds. The universe continues to expand and cool. And finally we reach the 100 microsecond mark in the history of the universe. If we were to take a census of all the particles in the universe as of now, there are 52.5 billion neutrinos, 20 billion photons, 17.5 billion electrons, 17.5 billion positrons, and finally 8 protons and 8 neutrons. There is also an excess of 8 electrons, that meet the requirement of the universe being electrically neutral. Like the W and Z bosons, the charged and neutral pions, act as short ranged force carriers. Since the pions are hundreds of times lighter than the electroweak bosons, they carry the residual nuclear force out to a 2.5 femtometers of distance, which is around three nucleons wide. However, it is still way too hot for the first nuclei to form. Yet. The universe continues to expand and cool. But going back to a fraction of a thousandth of a second since the beginning, for every proton or neutron created in this cosmic game of pinball, billions of photons, of gamma-ray light, were also created! The universe was dominated by energy, and yet again, what I referred to as a thin excess will amount to all of the matter in our universe that will ever exist! Along with the billions of gamma rays, there also exist billions of electrons and antimatter electrons, also known as positrons. The temperature is still too high for electron-positron pairs to begin annihilating, and they remain in flux. The universe continues to expand and cool. Now we reach the 1 millisecond mark. The temperature is in the tens of MeV. Electrons and positrons also known as antielectrons, even the sea of photons and neutrinos, continue to bash into the few isolated protons and neutrons, turning them into one another. This happens due to the weak nuclear force that acts at a scale 100 times smaller than a proton or neutron. When an electron gets near an up quark inside a proton, of which the quark has an electric charge of +2/3. If it is close enough, the up quark will transmute into a down quark, with a charge of -1/3. The proton has turned into a neutron. If this neutron hits a positron, it will convert back into a proton. The massless neutrinos, that act exclusively with the short ranged weak force, also have the ability to convert protons and neutrons into eachother. So at this point in time, protons and neutrons are always converting back and forth. So at first, the firestorm of mostly gamma radiation and electron-positron pairs, contains an equal number of protons and neutrons. The universe continues to expand and cool. However the neutron is only 780 keV heavier than a proton, and the electrons weigh in at a tiny 511 keV. So as the temperature drops to a few MeV, it becomes much easier to make protons than to make neutrons in these conversions, and so there are fewer and fewer neutrons around as compared to protons. Over the next second or so, electrons and positrons are also starting to go through the same annihilation, that the quarks went through right at the start of creation. Then, as we pass the 1.8 second mark, the electron positron pairs begin annhililating, and over the next few hours, the concept of antimatter will become a distant memory. The universe continues to expand and cool. Also around this time, the neutrinos have not annhililated with their antineutrinos, because of their massless nature. Yet, as the universe continues expanding as it always does, the neutrinos and antineutrinos are having great difficulty turning protons and neutrons into one another. This is because of the extremely short range of the weak force. When this process begins, the ratio of number of neutrons to number of protons, was dropping dramatically for a few seconds. The universe continues to expand and cool. So now that neutrinos cannot change the number of protons or neutrons, the declining neutron number then settles at a value of 3 neutrons per 13 protons. Yet, neutrons are ever so slightly heavier than protons, and should decay. As of now the lifetime of a neutron is around 880 seconds, which is too far into the future as of now. The universe continues to expand and cool. 