Cosmos Five: Trouble Brewing In The Cosmic Darkness! The universe continues to expand and cool. 377 millennia have elapsed since the beginning, and is flooded with atomic hydrogen-1 and atomic helium-4. The color temperature of the radiation is pushing 3 thousand degrees Kelvin, but is gradually dropping as we speak. Of the 10 million nucleon total. We have the following abundances for baryonic matter: 7.5 million hydrogen-1 atoms, 625 thousand helium-4 atoms, 578 free protons, 578 free electrons, 264 hydrogen-2 atoms, 103 helium-3 atoms. However it remains to be seen what kinds of chemistry will occur in this white hot, near vacuum atmosphere. The universe continues to expand and cool. From 3,000 degrees kelvin, or roughly 5,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the radiation temperature and matter temperature though decoupled, are dropping in tandem as we speak. As the temperature drops below 1,150 degrees kelvin, or 1,610 degrees Fahrenheit, of the 10 million nucleon total, 4 hydrogen-1 atoms stick together in pairs, forming 2 hydrogen-1 molecules. The catalyst here is the rare but intermediate formation of the hydrogen molecular cation, formed of two protons held together by a single electron. It’s the result of the collision between a hydrogen-1 atom, with a free proton. The universe continues to expand and cool. Then, as the radiation temperature drops below 530 degrees kelvin, or a relatively hot 490 degrees Fahrenheit, the matter temperature begins cooling twice as fast. Instead of the radiation temperature which as a time-temperature exponent of negative two thirds, the matter temperature now has a time-temperature exponent of negative four thirds, which means that if the radiation temperature drops from 530 kelvin to a bone cold 53 kelvin, the matter temperature will have dropped to 5.3 kelvin above absolute zero, twice as cold as the radiation temperature has dropped. The universe continues to expand and cool. Next, as the radiation temperature drops below 300 degrees kelvin, or a luke warm 80 degrees Fahrenheit, another 34 hydrogen-1 atoms have stuck together in pairs, forming an additional 17 hydrogen-1 molecules, making a total of 19 hydrogen-1 molecules. This time the catalyst here is different. It is the rare but intermediate formation of the hydrogen anion, formed of a single proton holding two electrons. This time, it is the result of the collision between a hydrogen-1 atom, with a free electron. The universe continues to expand and cool. The 19 hydrogen-1 molecules are all each formed of two protons held together by two electrons. Below room temperature, the following census holds in detail: 7,500,000 hydrogen-1 atoms, 625,000 helium-4 atoms, 578 free protons, 578 free electrons, 264 hydrogen-2 atoms, 103 helium-3 atoms, and our 19 hydrogen-1 molecules. The universe continues to expand and cool. So far, we have been talking about only a small fraction of what matter and energy exists out there. It is like saying we have a jar filled with 100 grams of gas. As we know from earlier, 75 grams would be atomic hydrogen-1, and 25 grams would be atomic helium-4. The truth that has been overlooked is this conundrum: An additional 530 grams of invisible intangible matter also exists. This form of matter consists of countless microscopic black holes. A black hole is a region of space with a gravitational pull that is so strong that not even light, the fastest thing in the universe, cannot escape from its deadly grip. In physics, we know a few things: 1). Universal Gravitation: All particles attract all other particles, with an inverse square force field, in three dimensional space. This is why all objects fall to the ground at the same rate, why the planets move around the sun in ellipses with the sun at one focus and the other focus empty, and why a line drawn from the sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals, and also explains why the semi major axis of a planet’s orbit cubed is proportional to the orbital period squared, along with many other gravitational effects. It is the gravitational acceleration of space itself, sourced by a particle, that spreads out according to an inverse square law in 3D space. This is what keeps your feet on the ground, and the earth orbiting the sun. 2). Special Relativity: The dimensions of space and time, arrange themselves such that the speed of light is the same, from all moving perspectives. This means that among many new phenomena, fast moving clocks run slow, fast moving rulers contract along their direction of motion, high speed motion breaks the simultaneous nature of time, and most importantly nothing moves faster than the speed of light. The fact that the speed of light moves at the same fixed speed no matter how its source is moving, means that the dimension of time rotates in an opposite way, than the three other dimensions of space rotate. 3). Quantum Mechanics: Every wave can be thought of as a stream of particles. The total kinetic energy of such a particle is directly proportional to its corresponding probability wave frequency. Moreover, waves with shorter wavelengths correspond to identical particles with more momentum, that is to say, the product of mass and velocity. This leads to the notion that objects can be in more than two places at once, how particles and waves are actually the same thing, how these quantum waves have discrete harmonics like the specific notes on a musical intrument, and the weird notion that measuring one particle can reveal corelations in the properties of all other particles of the same type. This is an extremely important concept: All fundamental particles are rotating black holes with the same mass and same spin as the wave they constitute. This means that all black holes are fundamental waves too in the same sense as of any other wave, such as the electrons of electricity and the photons of light are all fundamental waves. This means that we should widen our search for extremely exotic wave types that hardly interact with anything. These microscopic black holes will be a fundamental turning point in the evolution of what follows. The fate of the universe rests on the unification of physical law. There are three main sets of new phenomena, that were incorporated into the three pillars of modern science. The three pillars are: universal gravitation, special relativity, and quantum mechanics. The associated physics reduces to our common sense, by making a series of approximations. So even though our common sense worldview works well in the everyday, in the grand scheme of things, our universe is stranger than fiction. With this in mind, a black hole is simply a natural consequence of these three main concepts of physics. In a sense, every black hole is just as fundamental as every other particle of matter and light that exists. In fact, the only difference is their mass and spin. Therefore, all rotating black holes are just as “real” as anything else that exists. Lets see what has happened to this mysterious form of matter, so that we can continue our story of everything! All of these black holes have been colliding and merging, since the beginning, forming a sprawling network of black holes, called the cosmic web. The cosmic web is truly massive. But the reason I bring this up is because, before now, the radiation pressure was holding up the ordinary matter from gravitational collapse. But now, going back to when the light has been set free, there is no more radiation pressure to prevent collapse, and collapse it goes. The universe continues to expand and cool. As the universe expands and cools, over the next few million years, the color temperature dropped from white, to pale yellow, to vivid orange, to cherry red, and finally fades into the near infrared. If we were somehow around back then, we could feel these rays as radiant heat, although there would be nothing to see. Just a uniform still darkness all around. The universe continues to expand and cool. As for the matter, the gas is no longer uniform, and as the contrast increases, the gravity of both the black holes and the atoms of hydrogen and helium, becomes unstoppable. In just a few hundred million years, the cosmic web of gas starts resembling the cosmic web of black holes. This is like the scaffolding of a building. The black holes are the scaffolding, and the gas of normal matter is following the same pattern. The universe continues to expand and cool. As this new consolidated cosmic web continues to expand and grow, the scene will soon change dramatically to include new structures never seen before! The cosmos is still cold and darkness envelops the night sky. But a chain of events will form a hierarchy of scale, where everything will eventually depend on everything else. The universe continues to expand and cool. 