Cosmos One: The Universe Goes Bang! Before the beginning, there was absolutely nothing: No space, no time, no matter. And from nothing emerges everything. Thus, in the beginning, everything is an infinitely dense, infinitely hot, singular point of origins. This mysterious point, is what created everything that follows it, and obeys a set of rules known as the laws of physics. The theory of everything is also known as the unified field theory, because that is what reality is made of: Waves! But for now, lets turn our attention to the following sequence of events… In the first tiniest fraction of an instant, the universe explodes into existence, as a rapidly expanding, tremendously hot and dense firestorm, spread uniformly across space, and that extends infinitely in all directions. It is like dropping a nuke in every cubic micron of space, but then to realize that your cubic micron is now a cubic kilometer, as space itself, ever more slowly, continues to expand out in all directions. The universe continues to expand and cool. In just another few tiny fractions of an instant or so, the tremendously hot and dense, but uniformly spread firestorm that is infinite in extent, has expanded, cooled, and diluted, into a not so hot, not so dense firestorm, that continues to be uniformly spread, and infinite in extent. For some actual numbers, given that our “not so hot” universe, now means ten quadrillion degrees, imagine how incomprehensibly hot the universe was right at the start: ten quadrillion times hotter than ten quadrillion degrees! The universe continues to expand and cool. So. With this in mind, lets now track the evolution of our particles. Every particle in existence, is constantly smashing into other particles. We say that the particles are in thermal equilibrium. The average kinetic energy per particle, is uniform throughout the cosmos. Looking at the sound waves within the aether, we can see the waves are vibrating with an extremely high frequency. We will measure frequency with a new system of units. The electron volt. Its written as, “eV”. Electron volts are useful because they can be understood as, energies, momenta, frequencies, and wavenumbers. In quantum field theory, everything is measured in electron volts. Light speed is 1 foot per nanosecond, and one electron volt of energy corresponds to a wavelength of 1.24 microns. As of now, the weak interaction and the electromagnetic interaction, are one and the same. Moreover, every particle is massless, and moves at the speed of light. This will change soon, when the temperature drops below 246 GeV. The universe continues to expand and cool. Passing 1 femtosecond, all of the quarks, antiquarks, leptons, antileptons, and the bosons, are almost in thermal equilibrium, and haven’t yet aquired mass from this so called higgs boson. Yet after 10 picoseconds, the temperature drops below the threshold of 246 GeV, and the higgs boson activates. The electromagnetic force carried by photons, is now distinct from the weak nuclear force, carried by the W plus, W minus, and Z bosons. These intermediate vector bosons, along with the higgs boson itself become very massive, on the order of 80 GeV, 92 GeV, and 125 GeV respectively. Since the electroweak bosons interact between themselves, we would expect to find confined states of these bosons. However, now that some of these electroweak bosons have a great deal of mass, removes any possibility of confinement. However these are not the only massive particles around. Every flavor of quark now has three possible masses. There are the up, charmed, and top flavors, and then the down, strange, and bottom flavors. The same applies to the charged leptons, which are the electron, the muon, and the tau. The neutral leptons, the neutrinos, do not have mass, and as such continue to move at light speed. The three top quarks, which are the heaviest flavor of the up type quarks, have masses of 173 GeV. That is much heavier than the W, Z, and the higgs boson. The universe continues to expand and cool. After the next few hundred picoseconds, the top quarks and antiquarks, higgs bosons, Z bosons, and the W plus and minus bosons, are all gone. The energy of their annhililation, gets dumped into the remaining lighter particles. With these particles out of the picture, the weak interaction, reemerges as a short ranged force, 100 times shorter than a femtometer. In contrast, the quarks and gluons, are starting to feel their presence. This is why we call this the strong nuclear force. This force has litterally several metric tons of strength. The universe continues to expand and cool. As we pass the ten nanosecond mark, the 4.5 GeV bottom quarks, 1.7 GeV tau leptons, and the 1.2 GeV charm quarks, annhililate away next. This seems like a losing battle, as all of the precious universe building particles, are just dissapearing, one by one, until nothing is left. After all of this, the only massive particles left are, the strange quarks, muons, down quarks, up quarks, and electrons, along with their antiparticles. So, to summarize. In these first instants, all sorts of exotic forms of energy and matter existed, such as quark matter, strange matter, and even antimatter, existed in great abundance. The universe continues to expand and cool. 