Cosmos Four: Let There Be Light! This whole time, electrons and photons, pinball one another. The scattering of, electrons and photons, is fully described by the theory of QED. QED begins with the spacetime of special relativity. This spacetime is described by the O(3,1) group. The particles of QED, are representations of this symmetry group. Electrons are massive charged spinors. Photons are massless neutral vectors. Put together, they interact via a minimally coupled U(1) internal symmetry group. As of now, QED was not the main player in the history of the universe, as it was unified with other internal symmetries, into the SU(5) group. The universe continues to expand and cool. However, now that the nuclear reactions have stopped, QED is what is left over. The electrons and photons form a plasma known as the cosmic soup. In it, electrons are known as cathode rays, and photons are known as X rays. The chemistry of the universe is pretty much constant after the first few hours have elapsed. The cosmic soup clocks in at a temperature of 1 keV. Otherwise put, 11.6 million degrees kelvin, and dropping. In fact, it’s still too hot for anything tangible to exist at all. The universe continues to expand and cool. A day passes, then a week goes on by. The only thing that changes is the expansion of the universe. Nothing has happened to the plasma. Even after a whole month of this expanding and cooling, the temperature, pressure, and density, are all surely dropping, yet nothing else has happened to the cosmic soup. Why? As compared to the nuclei, which are femtometers in size, and weigh in at many GeV, electrons are nothing in comparison. Even the photons that carry the electromagnetic force, is 137 times weaker than the other forces. So not only do the electrons need to slow down, they need to be captured by the nuclei, for the first atoms to form. The universe continues to expand and cool. Every electron, cannot be crammed into a volume smaller than 386 femtometers, without producing antimatter. This is assumming that the cathode rays are moving near light speed. But, at this day and age, the cathode rays have much longer wavelengths than this, since they’re moving much slower than light speed. The math of QED, says that the electrons must be moving 137 times slower than light speed for them to be captured. With the electrons so spread out compared to the nuclei already, the cathode rays must have wavelengths hundreds of thousands of times longer than the nuclei are big. And that is a big problem. The universe continues to expand and cool. As months turn into years, then into decades, the gamma ray photons have stretched out so much, they are now X-ray photons. As the firestorm of a universe continues to expand and cool, not much happens for a very long time. The universe as a firestorm that is uniformly spread and infinite in extent, continues to expand and cool. However, if one looks at our huge sample size of 10 million baryons, something did just happen. Our last triton nucleus has beta decayed into one more helion nucleus. So while 102 helions used to exist, the extra helion added in, gives us 103 helions. This is the last time a beta decay happens for a very long time. The neutron inside the triton nucleus took 12.32 years to decay, compared to a free neutron decaying in 880 seconds, its an eternity. The universe continues to expand and cool. Decades pass by, then centuries, and eventually millennia pass by in the hundreds. The universe is so much more diluted now that its self gravity, which is slowing down the expansion of the universe, takes more time to expand by the same amount as usual. Up to this point, the temperature-time relation has been following an inverse square root curve. At one second the temperature was 1.27 MeV, so at 100 seconds or 1 minute, 40 seconds, the temperature drops ten fold to 127 keV. To arrive at the temperature we take the time to an exponent of negative one half. This pattern is about to break, as the exponent will shift to a value of negative two thirds. If the temperature in the near future of 100 thousand years is 620 meV, then if we project out to 1,000 times into the future of 100 million years, the temperature will drop a hundred fold to 6.2 meV. This is because matter will soon be dominating the expansion history of the universe. The universe continues to expand and cool. By matter I mean all forms of mass including not just nuclei and electrons, but also microscopic black holes that outweigh all of our baryons by a factor of 5. But that is for a later chapter. For now also realize that its not just the photons that constitute radiation, but also the ghostly neutrinos. If we just looked at the total energy budget of the universe, around this time the temperature has finally dropped so low to the point that our small excess of matter over antimatter now dominates its gravitational evolution. The universe continues to expand and cool. Moreover, all of the photons of X-ray light, have stretched out into photons of Ultraviolet light. However, as the universe expands, a new problem surfaces. Billions of photons might have an average energy of 5 eV or 58 thousand degrees kelvin, yet the truth is that as always there are high energy outliers. Some photons have huge energies well over 269.3 eV and as such we will have to wait until these high energy photons are gone until atoms can fully form. The universe continues to expand and cool. Out of the total of 10 million nucleons the following happens: As the universe expands and cools below 16 thousand degrees, each and every of the 625,000 alpha particles captures an electron forming 625,000 helium-4 ions. Of the far and few between helions, each of the 103 helion nuclei also capture an electron, forming 103 helium-3 ions. The universe continues to expand and cool. Next, as the universe expands and cools below 7 thousand degrees, each and every of the 625,000 helium-4 ions capture another electron, this time forming 625,000 helium-4 atoms. Again, the same thing occurs for 103 helium-3 ions, as they too capture their second electrons, forming 103 helium-3 atoms. The universe continues to expand and cool. Then, as the universe expands and cools below 4 thousand degrees, each and every of the 7,500,000 protons captures an electron, forming 7,500,000 hydrogen-1 atoms. Of the far and few between deuterons, each of the 264 deuteron nuclei also each capture an electron, forming 264 hydrogen-2 atoms. The universe continues to expand and cool. After that, as the universe expands and cools below 3 thousand degrees, the number of free protons and free electrons have not fully recombined into hydrogen-1 atoms. Instead, 578 of the 7.5 million free protons and with them 578 free electrons also remain. The last 578 free electrons have for the first time in history, stopped scattering light, leaving the now visible light photons to begin streaming freely throughout the cosmos. Let There Be Light! 