Cosmos Six: Cosmic Evolution Of Stars And Galaxies! As the cosmic web continues to expand and grow, the first irregular galaxies form along the filaments of the cosmic web. Just like dew drops on a spider’s silk, each of these galaxies is a loose collection of stars, gas, dust. As time marches on in the billions of years, the irregular galaxies merge into larger irregular galaxies. As it turns out, the densest regions of the cosmic web are where the irregular galaxies form. But since the cosmic web grows, the galaxies are carried along with the filaments of the invisible matter that consitutes most of the cosmic web. Whenever the filaments of the cosmic web lock together, is when most galaxies cluster and merge. Zooming inside one of these irregular galaxies, there is plenty of gas from the big bang, and along with the dust from previous supernovae explosions, creates a cloud of diffuse gas known as nebula. The nebula fragments into a few collapsing clouds, which in turn forms the next generation of high mass stars: Blue main sequence stars. 10 solar masses, and their surfaces burn brightly as 20 thousand degrees in the ultraviolet, as a sky blue color. The nuclear fusion has restarted once again, this time within the cores of stars! After another brief 100 million years later, the blue main sequence star, runs out of its initial supply of nuclear fuel. It expands from a radius of 5 suns to 530 suns. Its surface temperature drops to 4000 degrees, or about that color of incandescent white light bulb. It is now an orange supergiant star, with its core temperature skyrocketing, inside, it has onion shells of fusing elements and isotopes. It lasts for only another 10 million years. Every massive orange supergiant star explodes as a type II supernova! This star is no exception. The core has fused its last supply of elements into Iron-56, the most stable nucleus that exists. The core implodes in fractions of a second, into a neutron star remnant. The resulting conversion of nuclei into pure neutrons relases plenty of energy, that ricochets the rest of the stellar matter, creating a massive shockwave that blows it up. The energy from such an explosion outshines the rest of its galaxy for weeks, if not months. The explosion leaves behind a neutron star, which is a dead stellar core of compact neutron matter. The resulting elements from type II supernovae contains: 23 carbon-12 nuclei, 5 nitrogen-14 nuclei, 156 oxygen-16 nuclei, 14 neon-20 nuclei, 2 neon-22 nuclei, 6 magnesium-24 nuclei, 4 silicon-28 nuclei, 2 sulfur-32 nuclei, and 2 iron-56 nuclei. Massive star explosion, after massive star explosion, the galaxies are being seeded with the elements needed for life itself. Elements like oxygen, which when combined with hydrogen from the big bang, forms lots and lots of water, the universal solvent. The gases and dust grains disperse into the interstellar medium. A neutron star remnant is a very amazing object. A dense quantum object made of a plasma of only neutrons. However the neutrons are as compact as they can be. This is the same force that prevents solid matter from passing through itself, but here, it applies to the whole neutron star remnant at once: An atomic nucleus as massive as a star. For some facts, a neutron star remnant, has the mass of up to 3 suns, and a radius of a large city. We zoom back out to the intergalactic scale. A few billion years have elapsed since the first irregular galaxies formed. As the invisible matter of the cosmic web locks together, two sheets of this invisible matter, with each sheet being a network containing more than a few dozen irregular galaxies, merge together. What was two galaxy clusters is now a grouping of a few larger galactic mergers. Gas, stars, dust, are all flung in all directions. Gravity brings the matter back together into three large spiral disk galaxies, which in turn ignites more stars within these new spiral galaxies. This creates their spiral arms and pinwheel character. In the mean time, the invisible cosmic web has grown so much by now, that what was a network of irregular galaxies is now three huge hubs of the invisible matter, inside each a spiral galaxy. It is as if a cosmic dance is taking place, with the skaters replaced by huge incandescent galaxies. The three new spiral galaxies continue to absorb more and more irregular galaxies into their spiral arms. This slightly disrupts their spiral arms, but after another few billion years, each of these spiral galaxies has grown considerably, now as three grand pinwheels. Zooming inside one of these spiral galaxies, there is still lots of gas from the big bang, and along with even more of the dust from previous supernovae explosions, which creates several more clouds of diffuse gases that we know as nebulae. These nebulae fragment more, and due to extra turbulence from supernova explosions in nearby spiral arms, they collapse and fragment further into a few hundred collapsing clouds, which in turn forms the next generation of intermediate mass stars. One of these stars is the sun! 4.6 billion years ago! Our sun and all the others in the loosely bound cluster, known as an open star cluster, burn with a surface temperature of 6 thousand degrees, which looks more or less, like white daylight. The open star cluster disapates its sun-like stars into the disk of the spiral galaxy that birthed them. Nuclear fusion has it’s torch passed down to the next generation of stars! 10 billion years later, the sun expands to 60 times its original radius. This red giant star, and has a surface temperature of 3000 degrees, about that color of an older incandescent light bulb. The sun’s core has begun to fuse its helium-4 ash into carbon-12 and oxygen-16. This bloated angry red giant star, lasts for another 1 billion years, until it’s core becomes dangerously unstable. The core gets denser and energy waves from it, expelling plenty of stellar matter away from the diffusing red giant star into what is known as a planetary nebula. After a few thousand years later, what is left over is a very dense dead stellar core of compact atomic matter known as a white dwarf. The resulting planetary nebula contains: 69 carbon-12 nuclei, and 12 nitrogen-14 nuclei. Like the other supernovae explosions, the planetary nebulae from countless red giant stars seed the galaxies with even more matter, necessary for life, which includes a plenty surplus of carbon. The gases and dust grains disperse into the interstellar medium. A white dwarf remnant is a quite amazing object. A dense quantum object made of a plasma of nuclei and electrons. However the electrons are as compact as they can be. This is the same force that prevents solid matter from passing through itself, but here, it applies to the whole white dwarf remnant at once: An atom as massive as a star. For some facts, a white dwarf remnant, has the mass of up to 1.4 suns, and a radius of a planet or moon. Since many sun like stars can come from the same fragmenting nebula, it is very common for this generation of stars to orbit in pairs, and rarely triplets. This allows for a new phenomenon to occur. With an orbiting pair of sun like stars, one might form a planetary nebula first, before the other star even expands out to become a red giant. When the red giant’s atmosphere touches the other white dwarf remnant, it captures lots of gas and dust. The nuclei slam onto its surface, and sometimes can temporarily cause nuclear explosions called novae. However, once the white dwarf remant starts to fuse elements into Iron-56, the same element that kills massive stars one by one, the remnant detonates. The resulting shockwave shreds the other star down to a cloud of plasma. This is called a type Ia supernova. The energy from such a supernova explosion outshines the rest of its galaxy for many weeks. Since every white dwarf remant always reaches the same mass before they explode, each exploding white dwarf remnant always has the same luminosity. A standard candle if you will… The resulting type Ia supernova contains: 2 silicon-28 nuclei, 1 sulfur-32 nucleus, 1 argon-36 nucleus, and 3 iron-56 nuclei. Although iron as a nuclear fuel, is a star killer, most of the iron in the cosmos comes from supernovae like these. The gases and dust grains disperse into the interstellar medium. We zoom back out to the intergalactic scale once again. At this point the three main spiral galaxies are about to merge together. In front of us is the Milky Way galaxy. A barred spiral galaxy about 100 thousand light years across. 2 million light years, over to the left is the grand spiral galaxy: Andromeda. It is 250 thousand light years across. Another 800 thousand light years, further left of the Andromeda galaxy, is a much smaller pinwheel galaxy: Triangulum. This galaxy is 70 thousand light years across. However, as time passes in the tens of billions of years, the Milky Way galaxy and Andromeda galaxies approach one another, spinning through space, in a knife edge configuration. During their collision, they pass right through each-other, flinging their guts millions of light years into space. Meanwhile, the Triangulum galaxy, shoots right through the crime scene at a relatively high speed. The seemily double spiral galaxy with two long tails, gradually reforms itself into a new conglomeration of old stars known as an elliptical galaxy. The remants of the two tails continue to get eaten up by the newly formed elliptical galaxy’s immense gravity. The Triangulum galaxy, comes back into the scene and is absorbed into the new Milkomeda galaxy. A slightly flattened eliptical galaxy, known as a lenticular galaxy. The last stars to form are red dwarf stars: stars smaller than the sun, and far dimmer. Their surface temperature is around 3500 degrees, and are about a quarter of what was our sun’s mass and radius. They steadily fuse hydrogen-1 into helium-4, over a great timespan. The first of these stars will only fade after many trillions of years into the future. Most red dwarf stars, come in pairs, triplets, or even larger solar systems. Again this is due to the fragmenting nebulae. With much more dust, and plenty of turbulence, from previous supernovae, later and later generations of stars, will be smaller, and more numerous. By then, the milkomeda galaxy, will just be a universally spread out galaxy, with stars receding away from one another faster and faster. Due to a cosmic vacuum expansion, driving the acceleration of the universe’s expansion history. It isn’t long until a red dwarf star sits there in the whole universe, completely isolated, no record of the big bang, no other matter or stars that can even reach us from here. After these stars fade is the universe over. What remains is an ever expanding vacuum of empty space! 