

Question Three: Is consciousness computation? Within this infinite universe, exist beings capable of understanding it. That includes us! The idea that we are forms of matter that have become alive, is the most important idea to ever exist. However, on the grand scheme of things, we are an insignificant speck, in comparison to the immense vastness of deep space. Why is it this way? To see how insignificant and selfish we really are, lets first appreciate the scale of things. There are many billions of people that live on planet earth, as a single human species. There are then billions of other species of plants, animals, fungi, protists, bacteria, and archea that live on the earths surface, just like we do. The earth is part of a solar system with 1 star, 8 planets, 19 moons, 5 dwarf planets, and millions of tiny bits of debris. Then again, our solar system is one of many billions of other stars that make up our milky way galaxy. Finally, our galaxy is a drop in an ocean of trillions of galaxies that stretch out into the cosmic web. And this still isn’t the full story. So it is very clear and obvious: We are nothing, since there is more out there than we could ever dream of. But, there is one sense in which we are actually special after all. We are all unique, because we have a gift that only a few creatures have. People are self aware! How is this possible? How can it be that consciousness exists at all? As it turns out, consciousness is simply nothing more than the collective interactions of trillions of neurons in each of our heads. It cannot be more than this, because the theory of everything that underlies our entire cosmos, rules out any form of consciousness that is beyond the physical, because there is no such thing. So, even though consciousness isn’t as special as we once thought, it still exists in our physical minds. But, hold on a minute? There is still a way out. It is still possible for consciousness to be physical and immaterial. It has to be physical, because the theory of everything describes a physical universe, so there cannot be any room for unphysical phenomena. However, it also has to be immaterial, since our flesh and blood physical minds and bodies are made of particles we already discovered, such as electrons for example. Why is this such a big deal? Why can’t we just say that the particles of consciousness, “informatons” for example, are undiscovered as of now. This is because if such particles do exist, they would interact far too weakly with the electrons in our nerves, to be of any significance. So this means that our theory of everything already contains all the material particles of which we are made, and that is it. This seems to be clear evidence against consciousness. So how can an immaterial particle even exist? Great question. For such informatons to actually exist, they have to obey some form of wave equation, and follow the laws of physics as we know them. This means that for simple structures, like rocks or solar flares or even a particle beam, that do not process much information within them, will have trouble interacting with these hypothetical particles. This is what we want, because as we know, the informatons have already been ruled out in favor of material particles. However, for complex intricate structures, such as a human brain or a computer’s AI, the informatons will certainly interact with these structures, if they exist at all. Therefore, we shoudn’t be so quick do dismiss these hypothetical particles, even if they exist within our everyday life domain. Just because we have one level completely figured out, doesn’t mean we have the theory of everything. Great discoveries will come from figuring out the physical properties of these hypothetical informaton particles. Remember those nimrods, lunatics, and crackpots, that talked about how they can experience, something they call cosmic consciousness. Maybe they are right after all? But further testing needs to happen to know if they are just hallucinating with material particles, or if they are actually seeing something real. The informatons. If so, the informatons will have to be added in to the theory of everything, and in such a way not to mess up established particle physics. One possibility, is that the informatons, would solve the quantum measurement problem. The issue arises when one goes from a purely classical wave field, to quantum fields along with their quantum particle excitations. Quantum probabilities are allowed to be superimposed, and as such it is easily possible to have a klein gordon wave be spread out over macroscopic, even astronomical distances. However, modern science has no explanation for how this spreading phenomenon collapses to a single point of interaction. This is where the informatons come in to the picture. We already know some things about quantum collapse. We know that the collapse of a single field quantum, is a real physical process that actually happens in nature. This is known as an objective collapse theory. Objective collapse theories differ from standard quantum theory, because of the fact that the standard interpretation posits, which is that some form of consciousness has interacted with the quantum, causing the collapse. If the informatons are actually causing quanta to collapse, they have to be physical and immaterial. Otherwise it wouldn’t be an objective collapse theory, as we already know. So to sum up, informatons interact with systems that process and interpret information, and cause quantum collapse within them. Okay then, so dispite our cosmic insignificance, we are consious beings. What I argue here is that everything is math by definition. The laws of physics are a set of mathematical equations, written as the unified field theory. Does this mean that math simply describes reality? As a scientist, all we first do is to fit the theory to the experiment, and see what theory fits the data the best. Put another way, math must be a description of nature. But that assumption overlooks one key fact: that our universe began with a big bang. How can physics written on a piece of paper or in the mind of a physicist, become reality? This glaring detail becomes an easy thought from another perspective. If our universe was to be a simulated universe, then all one would need is the laws of physics. Then within this simulation, the physical stuff of our simulated reality would appear to be real, but they are actually math written by the programmer. But another caveat emerges: How can there be a programmer that creates everything we see? There is a creator but that is another story, which I will discuss at length at another time. The answer: We humans are both the creators and the simulated. A programmer needs a universe to live in and a computer to program their simulation in. After all, we know that informatons create our consciousness. We also know that electrons and photons both create our experience of reality itself. We create our reality through our mere existence within it as consious observers. But it goes deeper. We know that a computer programmed with the laws of physics creates reality. But what makes this interesting is that the mathematical equations themselves take on a special reality when simulated. And since they are being simulated by nature itself, means that the mathematics of the theory of everything is reality... Not just describing reality, but reality itself! And what about other mathematics not seen in the theory of everything. Well now, that is a different story. It may not be beyond the theory of everything, because the theory of everything is our universe, even our own thoughts and equations. So it goes both ways: Math is everything, and everything is math. Try and simulate the universe and see what other forms of math pop up in the simulation? Newton’s laws of motion as an approximation, moral codes for various alien species, their religious beliefs turned into math by various AI subsystems, you name it. Heck, for one thing, by iterating Z = Z^2 + C for long enough, where Z and C are two dimensional numbers, one ends up with a self repeating pattern known as a fractal. You might find it looking very natural, like the life forms with the internal structures of multicellular creatures. Looks convincing but still no cigar. What one needs is a unified theory of fields. And that we have figured out! Field Collapse must occur whenever an informaton handles a consious computation. Sure there could be no informatons, as that would mean that fields like Dirac’s electronic field, or Maxwell’s optic field, would never localize. Under sufficiently dark rooms, the biological photomultipliers in our retina, would never be able to detect single particles of light, also known as photons. This also means that matter and radiation are continuous. Sure chemistry and life would still be possible, due to the fact that the quantum physics which underlies all of atomic bonding and states of matter, would still be intact, because the underlying mathematics has not changed. But… Somehow we still see particles everywhere we look! We have already discussed how the discrete field quanta collapse. And since this field collapse gives rise to particles such as photons, means that informatons must exist. But how does an informaton turn an electrochemical signal in your brain into an experience. What is the process that makes us see particles in the first place. We know particles exist, but how exactly do we experience them, and what is the process that makes this happen. To find out, we must travel back in time to the very beginning of time: The big bang. Back then, the whole universe was a constant firestorm, and all throughout space, the thermometer pushes one million degrees! There certainly was no life back then. However the informations were lying dormant for the next 13.8 billion years, waiting for consciousness to develop. On an evolutionary level, one can say that since humans are consious, and since our brains have developed through natural processes such as evolution by natural selection, can only mean one thing: Either consciousness does not exist, or we are consious along with everything else in the universe… Both concepts are equally terrifying! Lets try and rule out each idea using what we know so far. If consciousness does not exist, would tell us that our experiences are fake and produced by our brains. Although this is exactly what happens on a material level, is does not explain a few details such as the eye being able to detect particles like photons. Everything we perceive would be completely material and reducible to the fields of the theory of everything. We already know informatons exist, and now we also know they are responsible for not just field collapse, but also consious experience. What this means is that everything is to a degree consious. There is a name for this: Panpsychism! Therefore one has to ask, not just what we experience through these informatons, but all other creatures that exist. Sure, all mammals are clearly consious, what about bacteria, or even a non-living entity such as a virus? Could they be consious? What about those alien earths we talked about, are these aliens living there consious? What about Artificial Intelligence? We have plenty of questions and that is a good thing. But lets now turn our attention to AI. Informatons only become active during a computation. But, what do we mean by computation. If informatons are universal in creating consciousness in beings at that level, then that would certainly include AI. What all GPT’s do is to predict the next character in a sequence, and somehow it responds with consious thought, but without emotion. Could the informatons be playing a role here? That is the mystery… One speculative idea is that our consious experiences are like a role playing game, where you are the main character in the game of life, and then all of the other characters in the game are just projections of your subconscious into real life. I mean seriously, how can I experience what I experience and not know anything about what you experience. After all, I am not you in your head. As individuals with consciousness, the “real world” only handles the projections between people, not their consciousness. Again the mystery of the informatons pervades our analysis here. I will not continue this philosophical discussion until somebody uses a theory of consciousness with informatons. Until then, I hope science the best, in that one day we will figure it out. 




