

Question Two: Why do we believe? But, there is more. Please tell me I am going to hell. It shows how other faithful people think. But I personally know that science as a way for understanding nature, does a much better job of replicating reality, than any religion. I am a firm believer in the science, and not in the book’s of any person. That’s the irony because those books are wrong and mine is right, not because I say so. But because experiments and observation show that this is the case. My book is a science textbook and also a holy scripture. And what is the cost of not taking my book seriously. At first, no issues arise. What you believe is what you believe. I am not here to tell you what to believe, as I am here to tell you how reality works. However, once you go out of the science classroom and into the laboratory, you’d better be careful. Engineers, Coders, and Thinkers, all need to be careful about this. Math is math, but only one equation describes all of reality. All of the other equations if used for the wrong reason can be devastating. What I mean is this: Nobody should pray to God for rain, but we must instead consult a meteorologist so their farm will supply and be in good health. In the same way, mathematics used for a particular purpose in mind, only works in real life, when the equations match the equations reality uses. This is why my book is so useful. It shows what equations to use, and which not to use. What is worse, is that many people tend to use a scientist’s creations for violence and not creation. This is the case for both terrorism and Nukes. Take 911 as an example. They were Muslim extremists, that died because they thought they would go to Heaven because the Quran told them so. This is very bad, since nobody should be using any airplane to crash into any buildings. I thought religion gave you morality. That now seems off. The airplane was designed to fly, but how to use it is up to the pilot, which in this case was to kill thousands. Also here’s another example: Nuclear weapons… Designed by scientists, used by the military. This is not just about religion, but about how we perceive reality. And lets be honest. I have no faith in a religion that distorts reality to a degree that makes me believe in a deity that creates reality in under a week, and then wants to personally destroy it, because he didn’t like it the way he wanted. Sounds more like a dictator under the disguise as a loving savior. I am not going to fall for such a trap. Instead focus on science, and on making the world a better place. Humanity depends on scientists to do their job. Some of us here believe that the our world is flat, that the stars are just lights in the sky, that all sit on a dome that revolves around us. All of this is supposedly 6000 years old, and created by a wrathful God in under a week. And yet it is contained in a book that claims to be the truth. You talk to any Christian, and they will tell you that the Bible is the true word of God. Okay, lets start here: I am a scientist. For me to believe something on faith is like someone telling me to jump out of an airplane without a parachute because Jesus will save me. I begin with logic and facts, and then deduce my reality from there. But if all you have been told is to trust in a book called the Bible, and ignore everything else, I will tell you that you have been “Dammed” into believing a fantasy. I don’t intent to be harsh, but in fact, if someone will choose to believe something simple as a 6000 year old flat earth, then they’re just factually incorrect. I get it, it makes sense and it comforting to want to live on with your family in Heaven. But let me tell you something: For everything you have heard so far in this series about black holes, and digital waves, including the big bang and evolution, you might feel small, or worse, disrespected. The fact is that, facts are facts, they don’t change depending what you believe in. The universe is 13.8 billion years old, and that is just the way it is. We have measured it to be that, so if you don’t like it, that is just too bad. What you believe in is totally up to you to choose. Some of us choose to believe in fiction over fact, and faith over reason. And that is okay. This universe will not punish you for that, even those that society hated, were those who pushed the boundaries a little too far. They were called heretical, lunatics, even crackpots. But today, many of what is crazy, let us to think, “Does this actually happen?”. Even if 1% of those crazy people are correct, we have learned something. However, don’t worry about God punishing you for not believing in what you were told to believe in. The universe will not punish you either way. You are free to choose in what to believe in and how to organize you life. It’s your life, and its up to you alone to choose what to do with it. Do not let anyone tell you what works for you. That is your choice. For me personally, I would rather believe in what I know to be the truth, than to have someone tell me “you’re all wrong, because you don’t believe in this or that God. ” It hurts me, not because I care about what to believe in, but it absolutely does hurt to see billions of people misinformed about science and how it works. So there you have it. The Bible is a myth. But so is the Quran, and the Torah, and every other book that claims to have truth, only has faith in fictional events and ideas. What is more interesting is this: They all say one thing. That they are are the keepers of truth and everyone else is just a myth. Well I go one step further and claim all of these books to be myths. But hold on a minute, what about this book you are reading right now? What difference does it make to believe in such a huge universe full of intricate possibility and complexity, than to believe in your own beliefs. For one thing, science is truth, because it does more than claim “I am right and you are all wrong!”. It actually claims “See for yourself, what do you see?”. It is a common misconception that science has all of the answers. It is only a tool, and a tool to be used wisely. Today, we have the theory of everything, so we do actually have the foundation for calculating any answer to any question we’d like to know about. But the road to get there was rough. In a sense, we are all right in our own way. But... Only, if we would stop reading and start listening. In fact these mythological fiction books are not the whole story. Far from it. My book is still just the tip of a vast iceberg of facts. Its a big and old universe out there. Mocking any book is not a good thing. Plagiarism is a serious crime. However my book, “On the nature of things” , was inspired by Lucretius’ book, “Of a universe far greater”. But I feel as if the bible and possible other holy books are mocking the universe. I mean, they take reality, distort it, and sell a lie of everlasting life. This is a book about reality. So if you don’t respect reality as it really is, then there is no need for you in the science classroom. Get out! Or until you have got some curiosity for what is truly real and actually exists, there is no need for religion in my teachings. Just here to inform you of this disability of people have that makes them able to be believing in so much of this nonsense. The universe we actually live in, is a strange reality. You might say: Well my Bible has crazy myths in there that nobody can prove. Not true… The universe is stranger than any fiction, including anyone’s Bible. How cool would it be if someone does a miracle, that spectacularly fails because God works in mysterious ways. What is a miracle is the miracle of life and technology. How does a modern computer work, or a telephone, or a car. The story goes, so who what the inventor of the universe? Not God, but you knowing that physics works, which would all be besides the point anyways. The point: Your bible’s myths and legends are nothing in comparison to the awe and wonder of facts and laws of our universe! So if your religion damns you for reading this book. Its okay, you have done what most haven’t dared to do: To question the norm. We are the exception, not the rule. The cosmos is the rule, and we are to make of it the way we please. What does our future look like? To answer this, imagine what our civilization today, looks like to our ancient ancestors. Tens of thousands of years ago, we were tribes of hunters and gatherers, told crazy stories of countless natural gods, and most importantly we were intelligent and consious. Back then, we are not the biggest, fastest, or the strongest, of any animal on the playing field. But our intelligence gave us a superior advantage, that would ultimately save us from our own extinction. The same is true today, but on a cosmic perspective. Today we have a technologically advanced civilization, that could be brought to its knees by a whole host of natural or artificial disasters. Pretty much anything out in deep space can kill us, from solar flares to asteroid strikes. Then there is our own mess we made of our planet, in terms of climate change, religion and war, even nuclear weapons. Still to this day, our intelligence is our greatest asset to us. We should celebrate the fact that we exist, because nature is a dangerous place. Our future, if it happens will be an amazing experience. People with all sorts of technological superpowers, living on far off worlds, and praising the one thing that gave them life: the theory of everything. Our descendants will look back home to planet earth, as it was millions of years ago, and see us as we are now, just as we can read the scriptures of our ancients. Most importantly, science is the key to understanding the cosmos, including us. Test ideas by experiment and observation, build on ideas that past the test, reject the ones that fail. Follow the evidence where ever it leads. Question everything, especially the things everyone takes for granted. Moreover, know you could be wrong, since everyone makes mistakes. The theory of everything is the greatest thing scientists have ever conceptualized. As of now, this will require a serious paradigm shift, that many people are uncomfortable with. But, imagine a future where everyone is used to the idea, and where the theory of everything is common sense. This gives meaning to our lives, as insignificant as we are. We are not just a part of our universe, our even just in the universe. The universe is in us! We are the universe, interacting with itself. This is the source of our intelligence, and should never be taken for granted. The theory of everything, is what makes us tick. Without this theory, we won’t be here. This is why the theory of everything is so important, because we owe our existence to it. I hope you learned something interesting from this book, something that will help other people because it is objectively true. And I hope that something is the one and only: The Theory of Everything! And… Through all of us, all of this might just be a computer simulation! 









