Question One: What is Life? Due to information and complexity, for every black hole formed from exploding stars and merging stellar remnants, there must exist many colonies of microscopic bacteria. Similarly, for every galactic mass black hole out there formed, not from a few stars, but from collapsing nodes of the invisible matter of the cosmic web, there must be enough of a level of entropy to form intricate structures within every human being alive today. If life is possible, then why don’t we see aliens invading, warping, and trekking everywhere we look. Where is everybody? The answer is easy! We are not alone. Everybody is right here, on Planet Earth. When I hear the word alien, I don’t think of the latest AI Transformer Franchise, called chat GPT, no… I think of our species in relation to all of the other animals, bugs, and plants that exist in nature. Life as we know it, formed and evolved on earth. There surely was and still might be life on other planets and moons, which I collectively call worlds. But we made it! We made it further than any other of the aliens out there, we lucked out almost perfectly. That isn’t to say that humanity doesn’t have its issues. There could have been a whole slew of extinctions on other worlds out there, but we lived on. We survived, and we thrived, even in the most hazardous conditions! Over the earth’s evolutionary and geological history, 99% of all life forms are extinct! This is hope… In other words, if God is math, why wouldn’t some math be more conducive for life than other math. There isn’t a formula for human behavior and emotion, but that didn’t stop us from trying. The answer might just be so simple that scientists have overlooked the obvious. The theory of everything gave birth to our universe, and its laws of physics guides its evolution. Think of running a computer simulation of some math, to figure out what happens, and if what happens, if anything, resembles our home. This might be what the world’s religious people are referring to they encounter the divine. There is a creator: The theory of everything. There is an origin story: The big bang. There is an afterlife: Consciousness. There is a savior: The scientific method. There is a divine plan: The laws of physics. After all, the laws of physics are not known to everyone, just as everyone can choose to believe in any faith, can anyone choose to grasp the reality that is right in front of their eyes. You choose! We are the children of the stars, we are, atom by atom, cell by cell, person by person, the stuff of stars… Hydrogen from the big bang, Oxygen, Carbon, Nitrogen, all from massive stellar explosions, polluted the pristine gases of the big bang with heavy nuclei. Moreover the atoms from one hand likely came from a different star than the atoms of your other hand. We are litterally stardust… In a sense, our consious awareness of this adds another layer of complexity to the problem. We are not a drop in an ocean, but the whole ocean in a single drop. Think of it this way? The universe may be vast if not infinite, but it’s not size that matters but complexity. Starstuff that became aware of itself. And since we are the universe in human form, the universe is consious, through our mere existence. So enjoy existence while it lasts, because reality is a dangerous place. And moreover, what better thing to enjoy than to figure out exactly that. Most people are unaware of this revelation. That the theory of everything has been out there waiting for us to discover. So given this, could it be that, a paradigm shift of science and math is needed to find it or is it possible that everything we have discovered is all that is needed to know anything and predict. I hope that anyone reading this will figure out the truth behind their existence and use it for everyone’s good, not for evil. Science and the technology that comes from it, is a reflection of what we humans make of the universe. To understand this, let’s now examine our origins, including the history of how we came to be… Earth, birth of the human race, a species much like our own AI. Capable of great compassion. And great violence. As far as we know, it’s the only home to life in the universe. Why? What is it that makes our planet so special. And life itself? Everything that makes life extraordinary. Everything we see, is due to a chain of events we can’t see. The unified field theory! Unseen, but no longer unknown… We are the most complex creature on this planet. A big brained, two legged mammal. We’ve risen from the raw materials of the earth, to dominate and shape it. Wind the clock backwards, and the story about how we got to be us, is a puzzle that defies all logic. To find out we’d must travel back in time, to see the first humans walk the earth. From primate to rodent. Disaster strikes. Predators threaten to wipe us out. We ride continents on a collision course and face killer dinosaurs. From rodent to reptile, we faced extinction at every turn. From the land into the water, entering an ocean full of bazaar life forms, fighting to survive every step of the way. From fish to worm, back to the very first spark of life, we feel the bitter chill of global ice ages. To a single simple cell. Through nearly 4 billion years of evolutionary twists and turns, we experience the fury of cosmic missile attacks. And so its amazing that you can have such a beautiful creative process, coming out of something so violent and destructive! We must travel back in time, until we have reached the birth of the earth itself. This is the most extraordinary improbable story ever told. And discover why all of this. All of us, are here. But the big question is: Did it happen anywhere else? Life like ours, needs a planet, with the right temperature and size, a stabilizing moon, a protective magnetic field, and just the right amount of water. The conditions must be perfect… Yet, amazingly, there are countless Earth like worlds, waiting to be found. Thanks to the sheer scale of the universe. There are so many planets in our galaxy, if the chances are only one in a million, there would be thousands of Earth like worlds! Since our galaxy in one in trillions, the number of alien Earths would be uncountable. Alien Earths must be everywhere… A long long time ago, in a galaxy far far away, there was a collapsing cloud of gases and dust grains. Nuclear fusion begins again, and a star forms: Ours! The cloud of matter flattens into a disk. Clouds of water, methane, and ammonia, exist along with an atmosphere of gasses such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen. Huge bolts of lightning vaporize the dust grains into minerals such as graphite, quartz, olivine, and iron. Around the sun, asteroids and comets form and smash together haphazardly. A rock forms from the orbiting debris, one large enough to draw in other asteroids from a distance by its own self gravity. Rocks smash to bits, but the gravity it causes is too much, and asteroids snowball together into a ball 8000 miles wide. The impressive amount of heat created from these impacts has liquefied the whole material of the world. The denser liquid iron, sinks to form the earth’s core, and the molten rocks containing silicate minerals like quartz and olivine, float above the liquid iron core. Hundreds of these baby worlds form, most orbiting the sun. Farther out, ice clouds have condensed, forming the seeds for thousands of more baby ice worlds, also orbiting the sun. These worlds smash into one another. When all of the worlds, with their physics of being fluids and reacting to their self-gravity, all settles down. What remains is a system of 1 star, the sun, 8 planets, 19 moons, and plenty of other debris that didn’t form into anything substantial. The universe is a mess, and sometimes, its the messy things that are interesting. But 4.5 billion years ago, the solar system has a few hundred full sized planets and moons. The first five are, Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, and the last is Theia! All lava worlds, with liquid iron cores. After millions of years pass by, their orbits shift and vary, and Theia comes careening into the inner solar system. Theia smashes into the earth, like a planetary kid smashing an oil puddle on a rainy day! The impact ejecta, form a cloud of molten debris that reforms into a couple if not more baby worlds. After a closest approach to the re-melted earth, does our moon form. In the outer solar system, similar processes form Jupiter, with its 4 large moons: Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. Saturn, with its large moon Titan. Uranus. Neptune, and its moon Triton. And so on, with baby worlds cooling off into the shadows of the solar system’s kuiper belt. Pluto and Eris are two examples. The mess settles down, with comets raining down into the inner solar system again. These comets contain plenty of water, amino acids, fatty acids, and minerals. Though not exactly edible, they are the building blocks of all forms of life that will soon form. Now, it is here that things get really interesting. Living cells, are at a most fundamental level, are chemical reactions, dissolved in a liquid, with a boundary. For a man made car, it is Gasoline, Oxygen, and Heat, reacting in an internal combustion engine, that propels the gears and the wheels forward. For a living bacterium such as this, it is similar. Cyanobacteria have a Metabolism, reacting Carbon Dioxide and Water, into Glucose and Oxygen, using Sunlight as a concentrated energy source. The similarity is there for a reason, as, coal, oil, and natural gas, are the result of plants and cyanobacteria, taking in sunlight. By burning these fossil fuels, we release it back into the atmosphere. A similar reversal of energy takes place here: Deep beneath the newly formed exotic oceans of planet earth. A molten hell, cooled down to form a solid crust of Basalt rock. In these oceans, chemicals of all kinds, combined in all sorts of exotic combinations. It took countless tries, but once nature found the key to a succesful cell. The cells that made it passed on those genes for survival, and the ones that didn’t, just didn’t. This is chemical reactions turned into biological evolution within seconds. Hot magma oozes up through cracks in the earth’s crust known as serpentization. From this the acidic ocean water, meets alkaline water from the volcanic vents. The first cell forms in one of these environments, and the proteins become enzymes, like helicase, transcription factors, ribosomes, and kineticores. The cell divides and this is what guarantees its survival. Billions of years later, cyanobacteria evolve from these microbes, and change everything! Oxygen poisons most microbes, and evolution speeds up. It burns away the carbon dioxide and methane produced from volcanoes, throwing earth’s surface into a deep freeze. The oxygen reacts with the green dissolved iron in the oceans, creating rust, or otherwise put, iron ore, that settles to the ocean floor. With this mix up, continents form from volcanic islands, Granite becomes a dominant rock, instead of Basalt. Moreover, oxygen levels rise further in the atmosphere, together with the rise of first plants. 540 million years ago, life becomes unstoppable! From microbe to eukaryotic cell. From cell to colony, we adopted our respiration and metabolism. Then, from a worm, we evolved into a fish, and dodged extinction of a nearby gamma-ray burst from a supernova. The sea scorpions, and some horse shoe crabs went extinct. The supercontinent Pangaea forms from Gondwana, a continent near the south pole. But life doesn’t stop there… The suns ultraviolet layer reacts with atmospheric oxygen, forming the ozone layer. Plants and animals crawl into land. A swamp full of gigantic spiders and insects, then becomes a paradise of reptiles. Oxygen levels slowly decrease slightly to 21%. By 250 million years ago, 95% of all species die, from basaltic volcanic flood eruptions in what will be Siberia Russia. After the apocalypse, Dinosaurs reigned supreme for then on. Pangaea broke up forming the Atlantic ocean, separating Africa, Europe, and Asia, from the Americas. Small mammals, evolved that were the perfect snack for the dinosaurs. Then 65 million years ago, a random asteroid smashes into the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico. With the dinosaurs gone, many birds and mammals still remain. The mammals diversify immensely. Whales, Bears, Horses, Tigers, Wolfs, and you guessed it? Primates! In the last 2 million years, humans evolved further into people that can think, work together, and communicate, hunt and farm, build cities, and finally invent science. This is us, we are here! We are stardust that figured it all out… But, if the theory of everything predicts our existence, did life form anywhere else, and if so, what are they like? 

