Theory Three: Rotating Black Holes and Discrete Field Quanta At this point, we have all of the pillars of physics we need, in order to unify all of physics into the theory of everything. However, such a unification of physics will require two radical paradigm shifts. The first idea is all about special relativity, and how to unify it with the rest of physics. The second idea is to reconsider the properties of matter, such as mass and spin. Lets review some key ideas in special relativity before we move on. The spacetime of special relativity, also known as Minkowski spacetime, replaces the idea of absolute time, with the idea of an absolute light speed. With this idea in mind, the symmetries of space and time, unify into a structure known as spacetime. To unify special relativity with universal gravitation, imagine two gravitating marbles. Placed at rest an infinite distance apart, the two marbles will gradually begin to accelerate toward one another. The speed needed to break the fall, is known as the escape velocity, and is also the speed at which space itself carries the marbles together. However, we know that gravity spreads out with distance, meaning that the escape velocity would exceed light speed at a close enough distance. In a sense, space itself is falling inwards, faster than light can. And since nothing can propagate faster than light, everything inside this distance is trapped forever. This is the event horizon of a black hole! Going back to our two marbles, we know that they are actually two black holes. The mass of each black hole, is simply the size of its own event horizon. The year is 1915. Albert Einstein completes his General Theory of Relativity. Weeks later, Carl Schwarzschild found the spacetime geometry around a simple black hole. The Schwarzschild spacetime reduces to special relativity and universal gravitation, in their respective domains. However, black hole orbits do things not seen before in science. Time slows down, light bends, orbits precess around. Closer in, gravity increases like a rip tide, rendering circular orbits unstable. Even closer, and it is possible for light to orbit temporarily. Crazy stuff. For fun, lets dive into a Schwarzschild black hole. Far away from the hole, its gravity seems normal, since the paths of objects around it, the orbits, behave as we would expect. The slowest orbits are the elliptical orbits, like the earth around the sun for example. Faster orbits, like that of a comet passing by a planet, are known as fly-by orbits. The fastest orbits are the straight lines that light takes to reach your eyes. Closer in, say within a few dozen black hole radii away, the gravity is so powerful that light rays will noticeably bend, just like the flyby orbits we mentioned. On the other hand, the slower elliptical orbits are also acting very strangely. They undergo a phenomenon known as precession, which is to say that the closest point of the orbit, the perihelion, shifts in the same direction of the orbit itself, turning a simple ellipse into a daisy pattern. Then, at three black hole radii from the black hole, circular orbits become unstable. This means that a small push will either send us flying into the hole, or off into deep space. At this distance, orbits zoom and whirl around the hole. The orbital precession and time dilation effects are clearly noticeable. Closer in than three radii from the hole, faster and faster elliptical orbits become unstable, until we arrive at two black hole radii from the black hole, at which flyby orbits start being unstable too. The only orbits possible are the highly bent light rays, which also follow flyby orbits. Then, at a special distance of one and a half radii away from the black hole, light can orbit the black hole. However this orbit is unstable, and the light rays either fly off to infinity, or plunge into the black hole. Even closer than this, and orbits do not exist, since the orbital speed needed would be faster than light. Just above the event horizon, it is still possible to escape the gravity of the black hole. However, as we approach the horizon at one black hole radius, the chance to fly away gets slimmer and slimmer. Time slows to a halt, when seen from the outside. Then as you cross the invisible spherical boundary, you are doomed to hit the central singularity, where everything you know comes to an end. Seen from outside however, nobody even sees you cross the event horizon at all, as your image fades away on the black hole surface. In 1964, Roy Kerr found another solution to Einstein’s Theory, one that extends the Schwarzschild solution to include a new phenomenon, spin! In effect, spacetime gets dragged along with the rotation, causing even more mayhem to our orbital path around the hole. This is known as frame dragging. There are an inner and outer event horizon, and even an inner and outer ergo sphere, within which it is possible to extract rotational energy. Moreover, a rotating black hole, spinning as fast as possible, has unstable orbits all the way out to nine black hole radii out going against the spin, yet can have stable circular orbits traveling along with the spin of the black hole, all the way down to the outer event horizon itself. Even so, the Kerr spacetime, reduces to the Schwarzschild spacetime, for a black hole that does not spin. The spin of the black hole, is what causes this so called frame dragging. As an example, the orbit of the earth around the sun, is a near circular ellipse. The constellations of the zodiac, are the stars on the far side of the earths orbit during that month. The path of the earths orbit traces a two dimensional plane, known as the ecliptic plane. For our rotating black hole scenario, this is no longer the case, as any non equatorial orbit about the black hole, tilts. That is to say that the ecliptic plane of our orbit is shifting like that of a spinning top on the table. This is even more wild than anyone could ever imagine! Now imagine we have a handful of rotating black holes, all orbiting through a common spacetime, with their own masses and spins. At this point, we cannot solve the equations of general relativity directly, and will need to solve the equations on a supercomputer. Black holes spiral inwards towards one another and merge, releasing gravitational waves. These tremors in spacetime, then bend around other nearby black holes, which are merging themselves. Its just a gigantic mess of curved geometries. After a while, everything settles down to a few large black holes, with higher masses and new spins, all moving away from one another. In the theory of general relativity, matter tells spacetime how to curve, yet spacetime tells matter how to move. The matter we are referring to are the black holes themselves. Note that it is not just space or time itself that is bending, but our full spacetime geometry. This is the worldview we get, after unifying special relativity with universal gravitation. To unify special relativity with quantum mechanics however, imagine two quantum marbles. You roughly know their distance and relative velocity after measuring them. Lets say we want to measure the separation between the two marbles, this time with a much greater precision. The uncertainty in the relative velocity of the marbles will have increased by a similar factor. By measuring the distance precisely enough, the uncertainty in relative velocity will exceed light speed. When this happens, you have discovered antimatter! Going back to our two marbles, we know that they are actually two quantum waves. The mass of each quantum wave, is simply its own frequency. The year is 1925. Erwin Schrodinger finds a relativistic wave equation for these quantum waves. Weeks later, Klein and Gordon rediscover this relativistic wave equation, after Schrodinger abandoned it. These Klein Gordon waves reduce to special relativity and quantum mechanics, in their respective domains. However, Klein Gordon waves do things not seen before in science. Just for fun, lets take a closer look at these Klein Gordon waves. Like all waves, Klein Gordon waves can be decomposed into a series of plane waves with definite frequencies and wavelengths. Take one of these plane waves for example. It is called a plane wave for a reason. Simply because as the wave scrolls through space, it has wave fronts that are flat two dimensional surfaces, or planes. The perpendicular distance between the parallel wavefront planes, is the wavelength. The frequency is just the number of cycles per second. So in other words, a plane wave is the building block of any wave. Lets now boost to a moving perspective, such that we are moving with the wave. At this point, the wavelength is so long, that for our purposes, the plane wave is now a synchronized sine wave. Its like the tides going in and out of the shore, as the whole flat ocean seems to rise and fall every day, in perfect unison. As we boost to a slowly moving perspective, the frequency has increased very slightly, however the synchronized wave is now out of sync again, as another plane wave, with a very long wavelength. At such slow speeds, the frequency of the waves is fairly constant, and could be ignored. The remaining phase angle of our wave, now has a much lower frequency, now in proportion to the kinetic energy of its associated quantum marble. The inverse wavelength of our nearly synchronized plane wave on the other hand corresponds to the linear momentum of our marble. As we boost away with faster and faster velocities, the wavelengths of our plane wave get shorter and shorter, and the frequency increase becomes noticeable. As we boost much faster, ever closer to light speed, the plane wave now has a very high frequency and a very short wavelength, such that the plane wave now seems to travel at exactly the speed of light. Boosting more will only make the waves even shorter, as they continue to travel at exactly the speed of light. In 1928, Paul Dirac found another relativistic wave equation, one that extends the Klein Gordon equation, to include a new phenomenon, spin! The spin of the Dirac waves, is due to a new direction that these waves can vibrate in. In some sense, the more ways in which these quantum waves can vibrate, the greater the spin. Spin can only increase or decrease by half steps. In this case, we have a spin up and spin down electron, along with a spin up and spin down positron. Each and every component, are themselves Klein Gordon waves. It is only when we change our point of view, that the components mix into one another. For example, take a Klein Gordon plane wave vibrating purely as a spin up electron. If we rotate this wave, and look at it from another angle, the plane wave, with everything else being the same, is now vibrating as a spin down electron. Similarly, if we boost our whole setup so far, the vibration in the first two matter electron components, is now slightly vibrating the last two antimatter electron components also, also known as the spin up and down positrons. We say that Klein Gordon waves and Dirac waves, have the spin that they have based on this simple idea. Klein Gordon waves have a spin of zero, because if we rotate the setup by a full turn, everything stays the same. This is obvious. However, if we rotate a Dirac wave by a full turn, the components mix only half of what we expect. This means that it takes two full turns of a Dirac wave to return to its initial configuration. We say that a Dirac wave has a spin of a half, for this very reason. Now imagine we have a bunch of Klein Gordon and Dirac waves, all undulating independently throughout spacetime. Every quantum wave, vibrates in its own abstract dimension, with every dimension corresponding to the probability coordinates of every marble. This is similar to how the spin of all these marbles acts like. The Klein Gordon waves, overlap and build up, whereas the Dirac waves interfere and sometimes cancel out. In this theory, it is all about a new entity called a relativistic quantum field. Imagine a crystal array of quantum marbles that extends out to infinity in all directions. If we hit this crystal with a hammer, it will vibrate just like a big block of rubber. As it turns out, these vibrations are completely identical to our Klein Gordon and Dirac waves. Since these vibrations are nothing but sound waves living in a crystal lattice made of quantum balls and quantum springs, there should be a minimum unit, or quantum of a field. As luck would have it, every field quantum acts independently, just like a marble. Therefore our system of a bunch of Klein Gordon and Dirac waves, is thus nothing more than a collection of field quanta. This is our worldview after unifying special relativity with quantum mechanics. Our two worldviews, one of the heavy, and the other of the light, both share some common features. Black holes and quantum waves, both have mass, and also both have spin. Because of this fact, a setup of the exact same physical system in one worldview, will mimic the behavior in the other worldview. It turns out that the atoms and subatomic particles, of which we are made, are not marbles at all. They are instead a kind of quantum black hole. A quantum black hole, behaves more like an actual black hole if it is really heavy, yet also acts like a quantum wave if it is really light. Therefore, in order to understand this, we needed to unify the three pillars of physics into a single framework. This means that everything is one. Literally! 