Theory Six: Why Fields Are Fundamental In standard quantum field theory, one promotes field values to operators that act on a wavefunction of field configurations. However, as we know, this leads to issues related to the fact that standard quantum theory is an emergent phenomenon. So what do we do? We see particle trajectories in particle colliders, atoms in electron microscopes, and photons of light in the photosensors of a digital camera. What is going on here? The answer might not be what you expected, since reality is all classical fields, we cannot afford to reintroduce quantum theory, to make particles pop out. Moreover, the introduction of quantum physics to matter fields like the Dirac equation, leads to other issues like the use of anti-commuting variables. These “numbers” don’t have a wavefunction associated with them, so altogether, we lack a particle interpretation anyways, and the fields are treated inconsistently. However, there is a loop hole. Whenever we see a “particle”, what is going on is that the field has been localized. After all, wave packets, do act like particles. What if, it is possible for fields to collapse. Not like wavefunction collapse, but in a different way, that I call field collapse. This is similar to a Jpeg image file. The image is the field. One takes the fourier transform to find the frequencies that make it up, and then rounds their amplitudes. The result is stored on the computer’s storage drive. This introduces discrete amplitudes, for all field modes. What we are doing is much the same. To be rigorous, there is a theory known as the old quantum theory. Each fourier mode of a field is just a sine wave, as we discussed previously. Since these sine waves are solutions to a simple harmonic oscilator, we need to find the “old quantum” counterpart. The process of quantizing the harmonic oscilator, in standard quantum theory only produces the wavefunction for bosons, not fermions. However, the old quantum theory does describe both bosons and fermions. For bosons, one has the commutation relations, and for fermions, one has the anti-commutation relations. These are the same relations that gave us the anti-commuting numbers, and harmonic oscilator wavefunctions. But with a twist… Instead of quantizing everything, we discretize everything. Since all fields are relativistically invariant, one only needs to quantize a field mode in its rest frame, and then one can lorentz boost to any other frame. This ensures that the field mode amplitudes are all unchanged by a change in perspective. Thus a field mode at rest, is just a single sine wave, vibing at a frequency of its rest mass energy. Applying the old quantum theory to such a sine wave, one selects amplitudes whose square is an integer. Just like the wavefunction squared gives a probability that integrates to one over all spacetime, here the total value is an integer, as we are dealing with multiple levels of energy, each one a discrete field quantum: A particle. What makes this interesting, is that the transition matrices used for quantizing a harmonic oscilator, are the exact same that are used for the discrete harmonic oscilator. For field theory, these are the raising and lowering operators. But here, we are using these matrices to select discrete amplitudes for our field modes. The amplitudes are all square roots of the integers. For bosons, the whole numbers are allowed. For fermions, they are the binary numbers which are allowed. Therefore Qbits, in quantum computing, are just these anti-commutation relations. So, from this, one can discretize the field modes. But a question arises, how does this reproduce the Pauli exclusion principle, and the stats for particle exchanges with varying degrees of spin? Since each fourier mode, has an uncertainty principle built in, with each sine wave having a definite momentum, implies that matterial fermions must take up space. Why? Since the mode amplitudes must be binary, and since they are states with definite positions or definite momenta, but not both, means that cannot overlap, because this would mean the ampltudes would be greater than one. Therefore, the exclusion principle is derived directly from the anti-commutation relations used not to quantize but to find discrete binary amplitudes for each field mode. For bosons its a similar story, as their harmonic oscilator amplitudes are all resulting from the use of commutation relations. The same statistics, the same polarizations, the same exclusion principles, the same everything as the standard theory, but just a discrete classical field theory. For the spin stats, one must realize that it takes two full turns for a spinor to complete its rotation, but a vector takes just one full turn to do its rotation. This is the same reason why the exchange symmetry works for both bosons and fermions. Whenever we observe a field, it takes on discrete values. But what discrete values does it take? Imagine the setup. You reading this, are in a simulated virtual universe. The VR headset tracks your movements, and the screens update. Its the same here. The fields you see are discrete because of the VR headset. Without you being here, the fields will continue their evolution determined only by previous updates. Therefore as soon as consious observers evolved on our world, the spaceship earth, was the time that the fields started to collapse to discrete values. The collapse rules are as follows: 1). Bosons and fermions both have fields that before collapse can take on any field mode amplitude all real valued. 2). Bosons have amplitude A = sqrt N, where N = 0,1,2,3,etc, and their collapses occur with a poisson distribution to any N. 3). Fermions have amplitude A = 0,1, where N also = 0,1, and their collapses occur with a bernulli distribution between N=0,1. 4). Fermions and Bosons both share P(N=0) = exp(-A^2). 5). Phase angles for the field modes, follow the relativistic bohmian trajectories on the field, and are updated to the trajectory's positions a priori, and not just follow the field's mode' phase angle at all times, after collapse. Now that we have a method for finding our discrete field quanta, its time to use our single classical field theory. In Bohmian mechanics, or pilot wave theory, there is a wavefunction that guides a single trajectory in hilbert space. The gradient of the wavefunction in each of the dimensions gives the momentum of the cooresponding particles. In our theory it’s similar with another twist… Previously, we abandoned quantum theory, and replaced it with a discrete but classical version. So to be compatible with our theory, we have to redefine our pilot wave theory not for a wavefunction, but for our field theory. Now, we still use the same gradient rule, but replaced with a field. Now since there are not 3N dimensions anymore, its seems natural to just let our single field theory, guide multiple independent trajectories. Not, a single trajectory on a high dimensional wavefunction. But rather is this: Many particles guided by a single field theory! Here, everything seems fine, so what happens to quantum entanglement and exchange symmetries? Since the field modes are discrete, and since non locality is generated by the trajectories, not the field, means that every particle is indeed coorelated with every other particle. Lets take a closer look to a famous experiment. The double slit experiment! Here particles are shot into a wall with two slits in it. The particles are detected on a recording screen behind the wall. Since the particles are all wave packets, means one thing: We see an interference pattern on the back wall. The same thing occurs with single particles too. Its only when a single particle is observed before it passes through one slit or the other does the pattern split into a two band pattern of hits, not an inferference pattern of many bands. What is going on? Are there some spooky things going on? Nope, wrong again. The field theory describes the same thing as the quantum theory, because the field equations are identical to the shrodinger equation. Even for a single particle quantum theory, its the same… And thats why an interference pattern is seen, even when struck one particle after another! But now, something interesting occurs when one observes it before it passes through. Everything the same, the discrete field theory, collapses just like the wavefunctions do. Therefore its no difference what theory we use, but the field approach is much simpler, and thus must be the correct one! Turn down the intensity, and fewer particles pass through the experiment at any given time. The field discretness becomes more visible. Until one discrete field quantum is passing through any given time. The pilot wave trajectories are used because the discrete field behaviors are what encodes the multiple particle exchanges. Without the entanglement directly encoded in the wavefunction’s phase space, we are free to include multiple trajectories in our field theory. After all, when we turn the intensity back up, we recover the trajectories as actual particles. It’s just the fields themselves collapsing, creating the illusion of particles. Here is how this works: 1). Take the standard model of particle physics. As sean carroll's core theory, it is a domain specific truth, verified to a great undreamt of precision. Specified by a lagrangian density. Next, Reinterpret it as a classical field theory. Use the relativistic field theory version of the euler lagrange equations, to derive the equations. Then solve them numerically using a fourier pseudospectral method. 2). Introduce discrete field collapse using old quantum theory and the canonical transition matrices. Just like a harmonic oscilator in the old quantum theory, every plane wave decomposed field mode has discrete classical amplitudes, which are lorentz frame independent. Using canonical commutation and anticommutation relations to derive bosonic and fermionic heisenberg matrices, one can recover the transitions through the coorespondence principle. Not by canonical quantization, but by associating transition matrices with probabilities for discrete field mode amplitudes. For bosons one uses the simple harmonic oscilator in the # basis. For fermions one uses the 2 state quantum system in the Qbit basis. Therefore quantum wavefunction collapse is just the collapse of a single classical field to a superposition of multiple VR consious interaction events. 3). Each discrete classical field quantum is associated a relativistic bohmian trajectory. Not using quantum entanglement nor using feynman rules, which is wrong since they use a single trajectory in 3N+1N dimensions projected down to all N particles. Rather we use a single classical field theory guiding our N trajectories independently. The pauli exclusion principle occurs from the 1st order spinorial nature of the Dirac equations and the lack of it occurs from the 2nd order vectorial nature of the Proca equations. Thus the spin statistics theorem is derived from the fourier modes of collapsed field modes guiding our bohmian trajectories, think of the exchange symmetries but applied to the double slit experiment as a CFT(Classical Field Theory). 4). Each trajectory using the Kerr NP(Newmann Penrose) tetrads in the cartesian Kerr Schild spacetime geometry, sources the spacetime geometry from flat Minkowski spacetime, using the Poincare Gauge Theory, and with it the classical fields are coupled to this geometry. This goes full circle and completes the code. The point is simple, every discrete classical field quantum is by definition a rotating black hole. Using the xKS(cartesian Kerr-Schild) coordinates, one can perform Poincare transformations to spacetime frame hop from one bohmian trajectory in its own retarded time to the other's trajectories calculated from the exactly linearly perturbed classical fields surrounding it. From a global minkowski spacetime with Poincare symmetries, mass and spin, one gauges the symmetry in vacuum resulting in the Kerr geometry, which you guessed it describes particles with mass and spin. In a sense we got everything from nothing. A Theory Of Everything! And from nothing emerges everything. The only assumption we made was that of spacetime symmetries. By applying CGH physics to this void, we learned that rotating black holes and discrete field quanta are one and the same. From the field dynamics we can build our universe. Our universe is all there was, all there is, and all there ever will be. However, with this said, there is still plenty of work to still be done. We need to see how the theory of everything applies to our universe. We will learn that all everyday phenomena arise from the motion of atoms in the void, governed by a given intermolecular potential. From this we can deduce similar processes occuring in deep space, and show how everything from the most common elements to the structure of atoms themselves came about from events that occurred fractions of a second after the big bang itself: 13.8 billion years ago. We ourselves are a byproduct of the universe’s existence, so it’s really no surprise that we found ourselves in a universe such as this. The trick is to understand our universe by being able to show that the theory of everything does indeed give rise to the universe we see around us. After all we and everything else follow the same rules. The question then is: What are those unbreakable rules that the universe always obeys to the letter. 