Theory Two: Relativistic Quantum Gravity and CGH Physics This was the physics of the industrial revolution, written in 1687 by the greatest scientist who ever lived. Isaac Newton. However, by the turn of the 20th century, experiments began to show that Newtonian mechanics is not always right, and had to be modified to agree with these radically new groundbreaking experiments. There are three main sets of new phenomena, that were incorporated into the three pillars of modern science. The three pillars are universal gravitation, special relativity, and quantum mechanics. The fate of humanity rests on the unification of physical law. G). Universal Gravitation: All particles attract all other particles, with an inverse square force field, in three dimensional space. This is why all objects fall to the ground at the same rate, why the planets move around the sun in ellipses with the sun at one focus and the other focus empty, and why a line drawn from the sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals, and also explains why the semi major axis of a planet’s orbit cubed is proportional to the orbital period squared, along with many other gravitational effects. It is the gravitational acceleration of space itself, sourced by a particle, that spreads out according to an inverse square law in 3D space. This is what keeps your feet on the ground, and the earth orbiting the sun. In the theory of Universal Gravitation, there is a Universal Constant. The constant of Gravity has the value of 6.67408 / 10^14 m^3/g/s^2, in our system of units. This means that the strength of gravity is very weak. To get an idea on how weak gravity is, imagine two cars in deep space, each weighing a ton, parked right next to one another a yard apart. It will still take many hours for the two cars to stick together. Therefore, we can continue to say that, both marbles each maintain their motion, as they both independently travel in straight lines with a constant speed. Despite the fact that these gravitational effects can be ignored in the everyday regime, we still live in a universe dictated by the physics of: universal gravitation. The fact that universal gravitation works at all, shows us just how weird our universe really is. Universal Gravitation was discovered by Newton himself while trying to unify the motion of heaven and earth, and was published in his book, called the Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. C). Special Relativity: The dimensions of space and time, arrange themselves such that the speed of light is the same, from all moving perspectives. This means that among many new phenomena, fast moving clocks run slow, fast moving rulers contract along their direction of motion, high speed motion breaks the simultaneous nature of time, and most importantly nothing moves faster than the speed of light. The fact that the speed of light moves at the same fixed speed no matter how its source is moving, means that the dimension of time rotates in an opposite way, than the three other dimensions of space rotate. In the theory of Special Relativity, there is a Universal Constant. The constant of Relativity has a value of 2.99792458 * 10^8 m/s, in our system of units. We recognize this as the speed of light. This means that the speed of light is very fast. To get an idea on how fast this is, imagine a foot long segment of fiber optic cable. The latency of your internet connection would be a nanosecond. A nanosecond is a billionth of a second. Therefore, we can continue to say that, time runs at the same universal rate for both marbles. Despite the fact that these relativistic effects can be ignored in the everyday regime, we still live in a universe dictated by the physics of: special relativity. The fact that special relativity works at all, shows us just how weird our universe really is. Special Relativity was put together by Albert Einstein in 1905, in order to describe the strange behavior of the speed of light, along with four other papers that shake physics down to its foundations. H). Quantum Mechanics: Every wave can be thought of as a stream of particles. The total kinetic energy of such a particle is directly proportional to its corresponding probability wave frequency. Moreover, waves with shorter wavelengths correspond to identical particles with more momentum, that is to say, the product of mass and velocity. This leads to the notion that objects can be in more than two places at once, how particles and waves are actually the same thing, how these quantum waves have discrete harmonics like the specific notes on a musical intrument, and the weird notion that measuring one particle can reveal corelations in the properties of all other particles of the same type. In the theory of Quantum Mechanics, there is a Universal Constant. The constant of Quantum has a value of 6.62607015 / 10^31 m^2*g/s, in our system of units. This means that the amount of quantum uncertainty is very certain. To get an idea of how certain quantum physics is, imagine a grain of dust, weighing less than a microgram, sitting on your desk at school. After 30 years, your kid, now sitting at your desk at school, notices that the same exact dust grain has moved by a millionth of an inch. Therefore, we can continue to say that, the two marbles both have definite positions as well as definite velocities. Despite the fact that these quantum effects can be ignored in the everyday regime, we still live in a universe dictated by the physics of: quantum mechanics. The fact that quantum mechanics works at all, shows us just how weird our universe really is. Quantum Mechanics was constructed by a band of nuclear physicists in order to explain the rainbow of a fluorescent light source. To conclude, each of these pillars of physics, has radically altered our understanding of our two marbles. Our common sense vision of life as a mechanical linear progression, is just all wrong. Every pillar of physics, introduces a new universal constant. The associated physics reduces to our common sense, by making a series of approximations. So even though our common sense worldview works well in the everyday, in the grand scheme of things, our universe is stranger than fiction. 
