Theory One: Time, Space, Matter Before we begin, let’s first understand orders of magnitude. Take one million marbles, as an example. We have a unit of measurement, the number of marbles. I could write this as “1,000,000 marbles”, or as “1 * 10^6 marbles”, or even as “one million marbles”. If I define this as a mega-marble it means that I have now simplified this setup, by introducing a new unit of measurement. Since numbers can get very huge very fast, it becomes useful to define a new system of prefixes for our numbers. We have already met one prefix, mega, which means million. There are others too. A marble is 1 marble. A kilo-marble is 1,000 marbles. A mega-marble is 1,000 kilo-marbles. A gigamarble is 1,000 mega-marbles. A tera-marble is 1,000 giga-marbles. A peta-marble is 1,000 tera-marbles. This pattern continues on, by multiplying by one thousand every time. If we divided by a thousand instead of multiplying, we arrive at the following units of, milli-marbles, micro-marbles, nano-marbles, pico-marbles, and femto-marbles. Now with this in mind, imagine two marbles floating in the void. Both marbles each maintain their motion, as they both independently travel in straight lines with a constant speed. Time runs at the same universal rate for both marbles. The two marbles both have definite positions as well as definite velocities. This all makes perfect sense. In order to define what is going on, we introduce a system of units that measure space, time, and matter. Space is measured by using a three dimensional coordinate grid. The X dimension runs from left to right. Next, the Y dimension goes from the back to the front. Lastly, the Z dimension points straight up. By measuring these three numbers, we can find the position of any marble. This is just like the addresses in a city, which uses the street numbers, avenue numbers, and floor numbers. We thus define the meter as our unit of distance in space. The Meter is defined as follows: Walking in a straight line from the equator to the north pole is by definition 10 million meters. One centimeter is 0.01 meters. An inch is 2.54 centimeters. A foot is 12 inches. A yard is 3 feet. A mile is 1,760 yards. Similarly, a kilometer is one thousand meters, and a millimeter is a thousandth of a meter. The amount of matter in a marble measures its resistance to a change in its motion. Marbles like everything else are made of fundamental indivisible particles, called atoms. These atoms behave just like tiny identical marbles, since they too, like everything else, maintain their state of motion. This means that the amount of matter in a marble maintaining its motion, is then just the total number of atoms in that marble, which are all maintaining their motions. Similarly for two or more marbles, the total amount of matter is just the total number of atoms in all of our marbles. We call the amount of matter inherited to an object, as its mass, and is measured in grams. The Gram is defined as follows: By definition, a cubic centimeter of water has a mass of a gram. One ounce is 28.349523125 grams. A pound is 16 ounces. A ton is 2 thousand pounds. Similarly, a kilogram is one thousand grams, and a milligram is a thousandth of a gram. Time controls the evolution of the marbles. This is because, since the marbles are moving, their positions change over time. At every moment or snapshot of time, there is a unique configuration of our marbles. To specify which configuration we are talking about, it becomes useful to introduce a clock that measures which snapshot we are in. Playing each snapshot back in sequence, moment after moment, we recover the evolution of the scene. This is just like the pages in a flip book or the frames of film in a movie projector. The clock time is universal and we count the frames with a new unit of measurement, the second. The Second is defined as follows: A full day by definition lasts 86,400 seconds. A minute is 60 seconds. An hour is 60 minutes. A day is then 24 hours. One week is 7 days. One month is 4 and 1/3 weeks. A year is 12 months. A decade is 10 years. A generation is 3 decades. Similarly, a kilosecond is one thousand seconds, and a millisecond is a thousandth of a second. As it turns out, it doesn’t matter what units of measurement we use to describe the marbles, the result is always the same. As an example, we could define a totally new system of units with miles, pounds, and hours, instead of meters, grams, and seconds. Even though the numbers will be different, the physics of our two marbles will be exactly identical. This is true, even in different setups. We can therefore get rid of our units of measurement, and claim that the physics of the marbles will work regardless. With the physics of our two marbles, it seems like our lives are also a linear mechanical progression, because like the marbles, we too are made of atoms. We then conclude that our clockwork universe is made up of atoms meaninglessly drifting in the void, and is completely deterministic. This is sadly just the way it is. Or is it? 


