Theory Seven: The Theory of Everything The theory of everything, is all about a material. The aether! Within, exist a chaos of sound waves. As they undulate across space, their vibrations propagate in all sorts of exotic ways. All of this happens automatically, without any sort of divine intervention. The fact is, that the whole cosmos is entirely built out of these waves. In order to find out what these waves can do, lets first analyze their physics. In so doing, we will learn about all of the complex and intricate structures that these waves can form. This truly is, the theory of everything! As it turns out, a wave can only affect other waves nearby. This means that it takes some time for a wave over here, to influence a wave over there. The sphere of influence grows at a constant speed. This speed is the speed of light. Since light speed is always the same, means that from a moving perspective, it is time itself that runs slow. As such, space and time are unified into a new framework. Spacetime! Imagine finding a concentrated lump, or packet of waves. Seen from far away, this so called wave packet, looks very much like a dot, moving in a straight line with a given speed. A particle. However, “particles” act very strangely at microscopic distances. They act randomly, yet also are in many places at once. How can this be? This is because they are not particles, but waves. After all, waves are spread out entities. So it makes sense why particles seem to act like this. Moreover, these matter waves can also experience forces, meaning that they can push and pull on each other. This happens, because waves of matter and waves of force, can interact. If we take two matter waves, placed some distance apart. They might attract one another, because both matter waves are disturbing the waves of force in between. So, given this, waves of matter and waves of force can act very differently. Matter waves, have a property called mass, whereas force waves do not. All waves with shorter wavelengths, tend to vibrate with a faster rate, or frequency. It is this excess frequency, in addition to its frequency due to its wavelength, that is the mass of the waves. This is the reason why some waves, have the property that they can vibrate faster, yet be very spread out. These waves are our matter waves. However, there is more! Mass isn’t the only property that waves can have. Waves can also have a property, known as spin. That is to say, that the direction that the waves are vibrating in, its polarization, depends on our point of view. The amount of spin, takes on discrete values, of zero, one half, one, one and a half, two, and so on. For example, we say that, matter waves are spin half, because it takes two full turns for their polarization vectors to take one full turn. On the other hand, force waves are spin one, because under a full turn, its polarization vectors also take a full turn. Otherwise put, the more ways, or degrees of freedom, the greater the spin. But, what about particles? It turns out, that all of these waves are actually sound waves, vibrating within a material called the aether! The aether has the property, that it cannot just vibrate with any given intensity. The sound energy, or loudness, comes in chuncks, known as quanta. By definition, every quantum is a particle. The quanta of our matter waves are electrons, particles of electricity. The quanta of our force waves are photons, particles of light. That’s not all. Every particle is a wave of probability. An electron’s probability wave, is exactly identical to its matter wave. Similarly, a photon’s probability wave, is exactly identical to its force wave. The same applies to every particle in existence. This is where the similarity ends. For many particles, we need to know the combined probability, of finding all the particles at all of their positions. The fact is, since all particles of the same kind are completely identical, means that it is impossible to tell them apart. Because of this, our combined probability, can either add or subtract, when we swap two particles. Electrons are fermions, because their probabilities subtract away. On the other hand, photons are bosons, since their probabilties add together. Surprisingly, particles with odd multiples of spin half are all fermions, and those particles with even multiples of spin half are all bosons. Imagine the scene. Within spacetime, all kinds of waves, with all sorts of exotic properties, are all interacting in every possible way. It’s pure chaos! The violence of this mess of particles is just insane. Particles smashing into other particles. Its all about how these particles behave. Therefore lets now take an inventory of all the particles. We have already met the electrons and the photons. Electrons interact with photons, because they have a property known as the electric charge. The electric charge of electrons is either positive one or negative one. The matter electrons are all negatively charged. The positively charged electrons are the opposite of matter, known as antimatter. Matter particles and antimatter particles can cancel eachother out, in a violent release of light energy. We say that photons, particles of light, are carriers of the electromagnetic force. After all, light waves are electromagnetic waves. Photons are themselves electrically neutral. The electric charge is not the only charge that exists in the cosmos. There are two others, the flavor charges, and the color charges. There are four flavors of fermions, the up and down quarks, and the charged and neutral leptons. The electrons are an example of charged leptons. Every up quark has an electric charge of positive two thirds, and every down quark has an electric charge of negative one third. Like electrons, the antimatter quarks also have opposite electric charges. Just like how photons interact with electric charge, there are three other bosons that interact with the flavor charges. These bosons carry a force known as the weak nuclear force, and interconvert flavors into one another. Unlike photons, which do not self interact, the bosons which carry the weak nuclear force, certainly do self interact. We call these bosons, the W plus, the W minus, and the Z zero. Then there are the color charges. Quarks are the only fermions with color charge. They come in three varieties of red quarks, green quarks, and blue quarks. The gluons interact with these three color charges. They carry a force, known as the fundamental strong nuclear force. The leptons no not experience the strong nuclear force, because they are color neutral, and as such, do not interact with gluons. Gluons, like quarks, have a color charge. In fact gluons come in eight varieties, with each kind of gluon having a unique color charge. This means that like the W and the Z bosons, gluons self interact. Gluons have a color charge of a given color, say red, and a given anticolor of a different type, say anti green. So a possible color charge for a gluon is red anti-green. As usual, there is more to it than this. Each flavor of fermion, has three possible amounts of matter, or mass. The up type quarks, are the up quarks, charm quarks, and top quarks. The down type quarks are the down quarks, strange quarks, and bottom quarks. Electrons also have two heavier versions, the muon, and the tau. Why? The answer is the interaction with a particle known as the Higgs boson. It is very heavy, and has an unusual spin of zero. All of the other bosons, interact with charges, and have spin one. The higgs bosons don’t carry forces, but they do give mass to the other particles that have it. There are exceptions though. The neutral leptons, we call neutrinos, don’t have mass, unlike all the other fermions. The photons are massless, along with the gluons, which also are massless. However like the higgs boson itself, the W and Z bosons do have a huge mass. Therefore, the higgs boson interacts with itself. The aether’s material properties, are what gives rise to these particles in the first place. There is one material property of the aether that is the most important for our story, which is that the aether is a fluid. On large scales, lots and lots of particles can act like a fluid. But what is really interesting, is that the aether itself also acts like a fluid. Therefore, we would expect to find out, that the aether is made of aether particles, on the tinest of scales. It is the collective motions and vibrations of our aether particles, that give rise to sound waves within the aether. Then it follows that the minimum units of vibration, the quanta of sound, are not actually particles as we usually think of them. We call such particles, phonons, after “phone” for sound. Every electron, photon, quark, higgs boson, and every thing else, are all aether phonons. On the other hand, the aether itself is a different kind of fluid, consisting of its own particles. So just like how some phonons, be it electrons in electricity, photons in light, and composites of quarks in nuclear matter. We now know, that the actual particles that the aether is made of, should reflect the fluid properties of the aether itself. Well there is such a thing. Gravity! The ripples in the aether may describe matter, but the flow of the aether itself is the most important thing of all. Gravity. On large scales, gravity is the universal attraction of everything with everything else. This attraction looks and feels like a force. However there are no mediating particles to carry the force. Hypothetically, this so called graviton, would have a spin of two, and would move at light speed. It isn’t so easy, because gravitons do not exist. This is because we already used up all the aether phonons in the form of other particles. So how does a fluid aether give rise to gravity, without gravitons? Lets find out! The aether is a fluid like substance. It responds to the pressure, density, flow, and viscocity, of the sound waves within it. This response causes a curvature, or flow gradient in the aether itself. This is just like a whirlpool, sucking the aether down the hole. Far away from the hole, the gravity is weak, and the flow of aether towards the hole is very slow. Closer in however, the gravity increases like a rip tide, dragging sound waves into orbit. At a close enough distance from the hole, the aether flows inwards faster than the sound waves can propagate outward. Everything within, is trapped forever. This is the event horizon of a black hole! Therefore, these aether particles, are not vibrations within spacetime, but as a particle constituting space itself. So to summarize, matter tells spacetime how to curve, and spacetime tells matter how to move. In reality, sound waves tell the aether how to flow, and the aether tells the sound waves how to vibrate. Every aether phonon, is its own black hole. To be continued… 