Theory Four: How Everything Arises From Nothing The spacetime of special relativity, called Minkowski spacetime, has certain symmetries, known as Lorentz Transformations. They keep the speed of light constant, under a change in perspective: The relativity principle. They are the symmetries of spacetime itself: 3 Hyperbolic Boosts, 3 Spacial Rotations, 4 Spacetime Translations. From these symmetries, emerges new phenomena. In classical field theories that involve relativistic wave equations, which live on Minkowski spacetime, the mass and spin of these field equations, are a direct result of spacetime symmetries. Mass is the minimum frequency for a wavepacket at rest. Spin is the amount of change between field polarizations under a change in spacetime perspective. Due to the quantum principle, the mass and spin of a wavepacket, when zoomed far enough away, appears to act like a spinning top, with the mass being the top’s inertia, or resistance to changes in motion, and its spin being its angular momentum while spinning. However, all relativistic wave equations, still live on flat Minkowski spacetime. Sure, there could be interactions between fields that give rise to non-gravitational forces. This is what the standard model does, as it is a classical field theory, that maps out the possible interactions between wavepackets. However, in Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity, gravity is the result of the curvature of spacetime itself. Therefore in General Relativity, spacetime is a classical field theory in its own right. The reasoning to this approach is astonishing, because one has to invent a new way to produce classical field theories involving symmetries. The answer is a new kind of symmetry known as local symmetry. So far, relativistic wave equations had global spacetime symmetries: Mass and Spin. However local symmetries are symmetric only in small regions of the field spaces. We already encountered local symmetries in the standard model. They were not local spacetime symmetries, but local field symmetries. However, one might ask what happens when one makes spacetime symmetries local in their own right. The answer: General Relativity! Okay not quite, as I must admit. Although General Relativity is a classical field theory, where spacetime curvature gives rise to gravity. It doesn’t have all of the local symmetries of spacetime. Only spacetime translations become local symmetries in Einstein’s theory. However, what we are asking is what happens when all spacetime symmetries become local symmetries. In the general case scenario, one must intoduce a new concept known as torsion… Just like energy density currents and momentum density currents couple to gravity, spin densities couple to torsion. And, just like how the curvature of spacetime is the definition of gravity, torsion has to be included to make sure the boost and rotation symmetries are also local in nature. The result is a new theory called: Poincare gauge theory, or gauge theory gravity, which has field equations known as the Einstein Cartan Theory. However, in our theory, we are not to couple the fields of the standard model to the einstein cartan theory. And here’s why? Solutions of the einstein cartan theory produce black holes, whether or not we couple other fields to the theory. I mean why not let everything be fields, including spacetime curvature and torsion, and what is the deal with black holes? This is a bug, not a feature. Black holes have to be associated with a point particles… And as we know, point particles do not exist. At least in classical field theory. But, in this oberservation comes a truly surprising result. As we know we applied quantum physics to a single point particle, and recovered a classical field theory of relativistic wave equations. Therefore, if black holes are also points, means one thing: Every rotating black hole with a given mass and spin, must be associated with a discrete field quantum of a relativistic wave equation! And, in our einstein cartan theory, which we just coupled to the standard model field theory doesn’t do it justice. Black holes exist regardless of field content. What we need is a theory where black holes exist, only when the fields are vibrating, and when no fields are vibrating, there shoudn’t be any black holes present. Moreover their mass and spin should also be completely identical. How to do this? Since Minkowski spacetime has the same global symmetries, even in the case with the Einstein Cartan theory, there shoudn’t be any extra local symmetries. By coupling the standard model to it, we included plenty more extra symmetries that the Einstein Cartan theory couldn’t handle. Let me say it backwards: All local symmetries have to have global symmetry counterparts. And in the standard model, we only have a global spacetime symmetry, there are no global field symmetries. Therefore, lets keep the standard model and the Einstein Cartan theory separate, for now. Thus, in the vacuum, the Einstein Cartan theory, reduces back to good old General Relativity. How? Without any mass or spin present from other field theories, the right hand side of the Einstein Cartan theory vanishes. Spin vanishes, and so does the mass. Torsion is algebraic, so it completely vanishes without spin, leaving us with general relativity. But in general relativity, the energy momentum tensor is also all zero, due to vanishing mass. Therefore, one is left with general relativity without any sources. In vacuum general relativity, there are plenty of solutions. One can consult a numerical relativity simulation, just to be sure… rotating black holes orbit and collide, gravitational waves propagate around everywhere. And, everything is just vacuum. So clearly, one has sources without a source, particles in vacuum, or otherwise put: Everything from nothing! What we need now, is a way to directly couple these rotating black hole solutions, to our discrete field quanta. We need a way to produce the spacetime geometry straight from its solutions, and not the other way around. Enter the cartesian Kerr Schild spacetime geometry! In laymans terms, it is the spacetime geometry for a rotating black hole in orthogonal light cone coordinates. They have some nice properties, such as being exactly linear solutions to vacuum general relativity. They have constant metric determinant, are lorentz transformed solutions of one another, and in these coordinates, the vacuum einstein’s equations, becomes a simple tensor relativistic wave equation. Everything is exactly linear! No gravitons, no renormalization, no issues, just solutions that coorespond to point particles. And since, these solutions are the result of an exactly linear coordinate system, tells us that the superposition principle still holds. Therefore, one can reconstruct the entire spacetime geometry in the Kerr-Schild form. What is needed now, is to propagate the standard model as a classical field theory over this curved background geometry. We introduce covariant derivatives for all fields. However for the matter fields which use Dirac spinors, there is a sublety, which needs to be addressed: We need the spacetime frame instead of the metric tensor. Luckily Kerr himself, used the so called tetrad approach to produce his spacetime geometry for a rotating black hole. In some research articles, it has been reproduced in cartesian Kerr-Schild coordinates. Using a set of light cone adapted null geodesics, one can produce the correct tetrad frame field. Therefore to conclude the theory of everything, the standard model is a classical field theory. A consious observer collapses the field to discrete mode amplitudes. Then the collapsed field acts as a single pilot wave, that carries multiple trajectories, with each path being a singularity. The Kerr metric or kerr tetrad is computed for each singularity, in Minkowski spacetime. The fields propagate through this curved spacetime geometry, and the computation loop closes. This is what is required so that a computer simulation can be performed for the entire universe. 