Theory Five: The Many Failures of Quantum Particles What is a particle? Newton thought that particles are tiny points. Even Einstein’s theory predicts black holes as points. However by that time, science has caught up, but every scientist continued to believe in point particles. Even with the birth of quantum theory, the point particle persists. Why? Could we be wrong all along? The answer is a resounding yes. As it turns out, reality is not made of particles at all… But something else: a field! To really see the significance of such a paradigm shift, we first need to come to grips with what a quantum particle even is. Every quantum theory begins with a single equation: The schrodinger equation. This equation is what one gets when one applies quantum physics to a single particle. In other words, it is the quantum version of Newton’s point particle! Interpretations aside, the schrodinger equation is actually a field equation. A field is just a mathematical object that takes a value at every point in space, just as a particle is a mathematical object with a position in space. It is that simple. But, the details matter here, such as why the schrodinger equation has so many people baffled about what a particle is. For quantum physics 101, we recall how to apply quantum physics to a point particle. Back in classical physics, we know a particle is an actual point that travels in a straight line with a constant speed. Just like a billard ball. It has linear momentum, and kinetic energy. The momentum is just its mass times its velocity vector. Whereas the kinetic energy is simply half of the dot product between its velocity and its momentum. However, the shrodinger equation tells the same story, with a central modification. The solutions of the equation are now sine waves, with their wavelength inversely proportional to their momentum, and their frequency directly proportional to their kinetic energy. By adding many sine waves together, one can create wave packets: Traveling waves that look like a collection of point particles from a great distance. However, most scientists didn’t see it that way. They invented a slew of new methods to coax particles out of the wave equation. Lets examine each case, one by one. So here we return to our original question: What is a particle? One way is to reinterpret the wave equation as describing not a field, but a probability wave, known as a wavefunction. The amplitude squared of the wavefunction gives the probability density of finding the particle in space. Therefore during measurements, the wavefunction “collapses” to a single point of interaction. This collapse gives us the definite position for our point particle. But this gives new problems. Since the collapse is a result of a single measurement of a single particle, means one thing: One must introduce new dimensions of space to handle more particles… 1 particle is 3D, 2 particles is 6D, 3 particles is 9D, 4 particles is 12D, and so on… This phenomenon is known as quantum entanglement, or spooky action at a distance. And this is used to compute corelations between multiple particle probabilities. Another way is to keep our original interpretation of the wave equation as describing a field. From this, we apply the whole procedure of quantum physics all over again, not to our point particle, but to the entire field! The “quantum” field as it is called, has an infinite number of dimensions, each one describing the value of the field at a particular point in space. Each sine wave in the field, has a physical amplitude, just like the position of a particle. Therefore, the resulting “quantum field” is an infinite collection of coupled quantum harmonic oscillators, and is no different than our original use of wavefunctions for describing the system. Then, the energy levels of each quantum harmonic oscilator, corespond to a collection of identical quantum particles. From this, we have come full circle, as “quantizing” the field, gives the same result as reinterpreting the field as a multiple particle wavefunction. Something seems off here, due to the persistence of point particles. The reason for using quantum mechanics then has nothing to do with the shrodinger equation itself, and rather is all about the probabilities of measurements having to do with some sort of wavefunction, which lives in an abstract space of possibilities known as a hilbert space. We should pay attention to what the schrodinger equation is actually describing, and not force particles into our paradigm. By doing so, we lose track of what reality is, as human centric constructs enter our most fundamental theories. Particles are just one example of this. In everyday life, we see solid objects in motion: Particles. And objects move through a physical medium: Space. If particles are such a human centric construct, we have to make sure that this doesn’t creep into physical theory… However, there is more to the shrodinger equation than this! Every relativistic wave equation, reduces to the shrodinger equation in the domain that the speed of light becomes instantanious. So, if the shrodinger equation describes a field, and this field is what one gets in this regime where the speed of light tends to infinity, means one thing: All relativistic wave equations describe fields too! And it is this idea which makes some serious sense. Here’s why… The standard model of particle physics, believe it or not, is a field theory. If one took the field equations, and run them on a supercomputer, that would be all that is needed to simulate the universe. The fields equations are just relativistic wave equations, or otherwise put, versions of the shrodinger equation, that obeys Einstein’s theory of special relativity. In the regime where the speed of light becomes instantanious, does one recover the shrodinger equation. Therefore the shrodinger equation is not fundamental to quantum physics, but instead, all of quantum physics including the shrodinger equation emerges from relativistic field equations. Classical Field Theory is more fundamental than Quantum Mechanics! And the standard model, is exactly that: a classical field theory. Since quantum theory is emergent, there is no need to apply it to a theory which is already “quantum” in nature. Therefore the standard model is a theory which satisfies both quantum physics and relativity. It’s that simple! 